

****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 1 ****
The world under heaven, after a long period of division, tends to unite; after
a long period of union, tends to divide. This has been so since antiquity. When
the rule of the Zhou Dynasty weakened, seven contending kingdoms sprang up,
warring one with another until the kingdom of Qin prevailed and possessed the
empire. But when Qin’s destiny had been fulfilled, arose two opposing
kingdoms, Chu and Han, to fight for the mastery. And Han was the victor.
The rise of the fortunes of Han began when Liu Bang the Supreme Ancestor slew a
white serpent to raise the banners of uprising, which only ended when the whole
empire belonged to Han (BC 202). This magnificent heritage was handed down in
successive Han emperors for two hundred years, till the rebellion of Wang Mang
caused a disruption. But soon Liu Xiu the Latter Han Founder restored the
empire, and Han emperors continued their rule for another two hundred years
till the days of Emperor Xian, which were doomed to see the beginning of the
empire’s division into three parts, known to history as The Three Kingdoms.
But the descent into misrule hastened in the reigns of the two predecessors of
Emperor Xian —-Emperors Huan and Ling —-who sat in the dragon throne about
the middle of the second century.
Emperor Huan paid no heed to the good people of his court, but gave his
confidence to the Palace eunuchs. He lived and died, leaving the scepter to
Emperor Ling, whose advisers were Regent Marshal Dou Wu and Imperial Guardian
Chen Fan. Dou Wu and Chen Fan, disgusted with the abuses of the eunuchs in the
affairs of the state, plotted the destruction for the power-abusing eunuchs.
But Chief Eunuch Cao Jie was not to be disposed of easily. The plot leaked out,
and the honest Dou Wu and Chen Fan were put to death, leaving the eunuchs
stronger than before.
It fell upon the day of full moon of the fourth month, the second year, in the
era of Established Calm (AD 168), that Emperor Ling went in state to the Hall
of Virtue. As he drew near the throne, a rushing whirlwind arose in the corner
of the hall and, lo! from the roof beams floated down a monstrous black serpent
that coiled itself up on the very seat of majesty. The Emperor fell in a swoon.
Those nearest him hastily raised and bore him to his palace, while the
courtiers scattered and fled. The serpent disappeared.
But there followed a terrific tempest, thunder, hail, and torrents of rain,
lasting till midnight and working havoc on all sides. Two years later the earth
quaked in Capital Luoyang, while along the coast a huge tidal wave rushed in
which, in its recoil, swept away all the dwellers by the sea. Another evil omen
was recorded ten years later, when the reign title was changed to Radiant
Harmony (AD 178): Certain hens suddenly crowed. At the new moon of the sixth
month, a long wreath of murky cloud wound its way into the Hall of Virtue,
while in the following month a rainbow was seen in the Dragon Chamber. Away
from the capital, a part of the Yuan Mountains collapsed, leaving a mighty rift
in the flank.
Such were some of various omens. Emperor Ling, greatly moved by these signs of
the displeasure of Heaven, issued an edict asking his ministers for an
explanation of the calamities and marvels.
Court Counselor Cai Yong replied bluntly: “Falling rainbows and changes of
fowls’ sexes are brought about by the interference of empresses and eunuchs
in state affairs.”
The Emperor read this memorial with deep sighs, and Chief Eunuch Cao Jie, from
his place behind the throne, anxiously noted these signs of grief. An
opportunity offering, Cao Jie informed his fellows, and a charge was trumped up
against Cai Yong, who was driven from the court and forced to retire to his
country house.
With this victory the eunuchs grew bolder. Ten of them, rivals in wickedness
and associates in evil deeds, formed a powerful party known as the Ten Regular
Attendants —-Zhang Rang, Zhao Zhong, Cheng Kuang, Duan Gui, Feng Xu, Guo
Sheng, Hou Lan, Jian Shuo, Cao Jie, and Xia Yun.
One of them, Zhang Rang, won such influence that he became the Emperor’s most
honored and trusted adviser. The Emperor even called him “Foster Father”.
So the corrupt state administration went quickly from bad to worse, till the
country was ripe for rebellion and buzzed with brigandage.
At this time in the county of Julu was a certain Zhang family, of whom three
brothers bore the name of Zhang Jue, Zhang Ba, and Zhang Lian, respectively.
The eldest Zhang Jue was an unclassed graduate, who devoted himself to
medicine. One day, while culling simples in the woods, Zhang Jue met a
venerable old gentleman with very bright, emerald eyes and fresh complexion,
who walked with an oak-wood staff. The old man beckoned Zhang Jue into a cave
and there gave him three volumes of The Book of Heaven.
“This book,” said the old gentleman, “is the Essential Arts of Peace.
With the aid of these volumes, you can convert the world and rescue humankind.
But you must be single-minded, or, rest assured, you will greatly suffer.”
With a humble obeisance, Zhang Jue took the book and asked the name of his
benefactor.
“I am Saint Hermit of the Southern Land,” was the reply, as the old
gentleman disappeared in thin air.
Zhang Jue studied the wonderful book eagerly and strove day and night to reduce
its precepts to practice. Before long, he could summon the winds and command
the rain, and he became known as the Mystic of the Way of Peace.
In the first month of the first year of Central Stability (AD 184), there was a
terrible pestilence that ran throughout the land, whereupon Zhang Jue
distributed charmed remedies to the afflicted. The godly medicines brought big
successes, and soon he gained the tittle of the Wise and Worthy Master. He
began to have a following of disciples whom he initiated into the mysteries and
sent abroad throughout all the land. They, like their master, could write
charms and recite formulas, and their fame increased his following.
Zhang Jue began to organize his disciples. He established thirty-six circuits,
the larger with ten thousand or more members, the smaller with about half that
number. Each circuit had its chief who took the military title of General. They
talked wildly of the death of the blue heaven and the setting up of the golden
one; they said a new cycle was beginning and would bring universal good fortune
to all members; and they persuaded people to chalk the symbols for the first
year of the new cycle on the main door of their dwellings.
With the growth of the number of his supporters grew also the ambition of Zhang
Jue. The Wise and Worthy Master dreamed of empire. One of his partisans, Ma
Yuanyi, was sent bearing gifts to gain the support of the eunuchs within the
Palace.
To his brothers Zhang Jue said, “For schemes like ours always the most
difficult part is to gain the popular favor. But that is already ours. Such an
opportunity must not pass.”
And they began to prepare. Many yellow flags and banners were made, and a day
was chosen for the uprising. Then Zhang Jue wrote letters to Feng Xu and sent
them by one of his followers, Tang Zhou, who alas! betrayed his trust and
reported the plot to the court. The Emperor summoned the trusty Regent Marshal
He Jin and bade him look to the issue. Ma Yuanyi was at once taken and
beheaded. Feng Xu and many others were cast into prison.
The plot having thus become known, the Zhang brothers were forced at once to
take the field. They took up grandiose titles: Zhang Jue the Lord of Heaven,
Zhang Ba the Lord of Earth, and Zhang Lian the Lord of Human. And in these
names they put forth this manifesto:
“The good fortune of the Han is exhausted, and the Wise and Worthy Man has
appeared. Discern the will of Heaven, O ye people, and walk in the way of
righteousness, whereby alone ye may attain to peace.”
Support was not lacking. On every side people bound their heads with yellow
scarves and joined the army of the rebel Zhang Jue, so that soon his strength
was nearly half a million strong, and the official troops melted away at a
whisper of his coming.
Regent Marshal and Imperial Guardian, He Jin, memorialized for general
preparations against the Yellow Scarves, and an edict called upon everyone to
fight against the rebels. In the meantime, three Imperial Commanders —-Lu
Zhi, Huangfu Song, and Zhu Jun —-marched against them in three directions
with veteran soldiers.
Meanwhile Zhang Jue led his army into Youzhou, the northeastern region of the
empire. The Imperial Protector of Youzhou was Liu Yan, a scion of the Imperial
House. Learning of the approach of the rebels, Liu Yan called in Commander Zhou
Jing to consult over the position.
Zhou Jing said, “They are many and we few. We must enlist more troops to
oppose them.”
Liu Yan agreed, and he put out notices calling for volunteers to serve against
the rebels. One of these notices was posted up in the county of Zhuo, where
lived one man of high spirit.
This man was no mere bookish scholar, nor found he any pleasure in study. But
he was liberal and amiable, albeit a man of few words, hiding all feeling under
a calm exterior. He had always cherished a yearning for high enterprise and had
cultivated the friendship of humans of mark. He was tall of stature. His ears
were long, the lobes touching his shoulders, and his hands hung down below his
knees. His eyes were very big and prominent so that he could see backward past
his ears. His complexion was as clear as jade, and he had rich red lips.
He was a descendant of Prince Sheng of Zhongshan whose father was the Emperor
Jing (reigned BC 157-141), the fourth emperor of the Han Dynasty. His name was
Liu Bei. Many years before, one of his forbears had been the governor of that
very county, but had lost his rank for remissness in ceremonial offerings.
However, that branch of the family had remained on in the place, gradually
becoming poorer and poorer as the years rolled on. His father Liu Hong had been
a scholar and a virtuous official but died young. The widow and orphan were
left alone, and Liu Bei as a lad won a reputation for filial piety.
At this time the family had sunk deep in poverty, and Liu Bei gained his living
by selling straw sandals and weaving grass mats. The family home was in a
village near the chief city of Zhuo. Near the house stood a huge mulberry tree,
and seen from afar its curved profile resembled the canopy of a wagon. Noting
the luxuriance of its foliage, a soothsayer had predicted that one day a man of
distinction would come forth from the family.
As a child, Liu Bei played with the other village children beneath this tree,
and he would climb up into it, saying, “I am the Son of Heaven, and this is
my chariot!” His uncle, Liu Yuanqi, recognized that Liu Bei was no ordinary
boy and saw to it that the family did not come to actual want.
When Liu Bei was fifteen, his mother sent him traveling for his education. For
a time he served Zheng Xuan and Lu Zhi as masters. And he became great friends
with Gongsun Zan.
Liu Bei was twenty-eight when the outbreak of the Yellow Scarves called for
soldiers. The sight of the notice saddened him, and he sighed as he read it.
Suddenly a rasping voice behind him cried, “Sir, why sigh if you do nothing
to help your country?”
Turning quickly he saw standing there a man about his own height, with a bullet
head like a leopard’s, large eyes, a swallow pointed chin, and whiskers like
a tiger’s . He spoke in a loud bass voice and looked as irresistible as a
dashing horse. At once Liu Bei saw he was no ordinary man and asked who he was.
“Zhang Fei is my name,” replied the stranger. “I live near here where I
have a farm; and I am a wine seller and a butcher as well; and I like to become
acquainted with worthy people. Your sighs as you read the notice drew me toward
you.”
Liu Bei replied, “I am of the Imperial Family, Liu Bei is my name. And I wish
I could destroy these Yellow Scarves and restore peace to the land, but alas! I
am helpless.”
“I have the means,” said Zhang Fei. “Suppose you and I raised some troops
and tried what we could do.”
This was happy news for Liu Bei, and the two betook themselves to the village
inn to talk over the project. As they were drinking, a huge, tall fellow
appeared pushing a hand-cart along the road. At the threshold he halted and
entered the inn to rest awhile and he called for wine.
“And be quick!” added he. “For I am in haste to get into the town and
offer myself for the army.”
Liu Bei looked over the newcomer, item by item, and he noted the man had a huge
frame, a long beard, a vivid face like an apple, and deep red lips. He had eyes
like a phoenix’s and fine bushy eyebrows like silkworms. His whole appearance
was dignified and awe-inspiring. Presently, Liu Bei crossed over, sat down
beside him and asked his name.
“I am Guan Yu,” replied he. “I am a native of the east side of the river,
but I have been a fugitive on the waters for some five years, because I slew a
ruffian who, since he was wealthy and powerful, was a bully. I have come to
join the army here.”
Then Liu Bei told Guan Yu his own intentions, and all three went away to Zhang
Fei’s farm where they could talk over the grand project.
Said Zhang Fei, “The peach trees in the orchard behind the house are just in
full flower. Tomorrow we will institute a sacrifice there and solemnly declare
our intention before Heaven and Earth, and we three will swear brotherhood and
unity of aims and sentiments: Thus will we enter upon our great task.”
Both Liu Bei and Guan Yu gladly agreed.
All three being of one mind, next day they prepared the sacrifices, a black ox,
a white horse, and wine for libation. Beneath the smoke of the incense burning
on the altar, they bowed their heads and recited this oath:
“We three —-Liu Bei, Guan Yu, and Zhang Fei —-though of different
families, swear brotherhood, and promise mutual help to one end. We will rescue
each other in difficulty; we will aid each other in danger. We swear to serve
the state and save the people. We ask not the same day of birth, but we seek to
die together. May Heaven, the all-ruling, and Earth, the all-producing, read
our hearts. If we turn aside from righteousness or forget kindliness, may
Heaven and Human smite us!”
They rose from their knees. The two others bowed before Liu Bei as their elder
brother, and Zhang Fei was to be the youngest of the trio. This solemn ceremony
performed, they slew other oxen and made a feast to which they invited the
villagers. Three hundred joined them, and all feasted and drank deep in the
Peach Garden.
The next day weapons were mustered. But there were no horses to ride. This was
a real grief. But soon they were cheered by the arrival of two horse dealers
with a drove of horses.
“Thus does Heaven help us!” said Liu Bei.
And the three brothers went forth to welcome the merchants. They were Zhang
Shiping and Su Shuang from Zhongshan. They went northwards every year to buy
horses. They were now on their way home because of the Yellow Scarves. The
brothers invited them to the farm, where wine was served before them. Then Liu
Bei told them of the plan to strive for tranquillity. Zhang Shiping and Su
Shuang were glad and at once gave the brothers fifty good steeds, and beside,
five hundred ounces of gold and silver and one thousand five hundred pounds of
steel fit for the forging of weapons.
The brothers expressed their gratitude, and the merchants took their leave.
Then blacksmiths were summoned to forge weapons. For Liu Bei they made a pair
of ancient swords; for Guan Yu they fashioned a long-handled, curve blade
called Green-Dragon Saber, which weighed a full one hundred pounds; and for
Zhang Fei they created a ten-foot spear called Serpent Halberd. Each too had a
helmet and full armor.
When weapons were ready, the troop, now five hundred strong, marched to
Commander Zhou Jing, who presented them to Imperial Protector Liu Yan. When the
ceremony of introduction was over, Liu Bei declared his ancestry, and Liu Yan
at once accorded him the esteem due to a relation.
Before many days it was announced that the rebellion had actually broken out,
and a Yellow Scarves chieftain, Cheng Yuanzhi, had invaded the region with a
body of fifty thousand rebels. Liu Yan bade Zhou Jing and the three brothers to
go out to oppose them with the five hundred troops. Liu Bei joyfully undertook
to lead the van and marched to the foot of the Daxing Hills where they saw the
rebels. The rebels wore their hair flying about their shoulders, and their
foreheads were bound with yellow scarves.
When the two armies had been drawn up opposite each other, Liu Bei rode to the
front, Guan Yu to his left, Zhang Fei to his right.
Flourishing his whip, Liu Bei began to hurl reproaches at the rebels, crying,
“O malcontents! Why not dismount and be bound?”
Their leader Cheng Yuanzhi, full of rage, sent out one general, Deng Mao, to
begin the battle. At once rode forward Zhang Fei, his serpent halberd poised to
strike. One thrust and Deng Mao rolled off his horse, pierced through the
heart. At this Cheng Yuanzhi himself whipped up his steed and rode forth with
sword raised ready to slay Zhang Fei. But Guan Yu swung up his ponderous green-
dragon saber and rode at Cheng Yuanzhi. At the sight, fear seized upon Cheng
Yuanzhi, and before he could defend himself, the great saber fell, cutting him
in halves.
Two heroes new to war’s alarms,
Ride boldly forth to try their arms.
Their doughty deeds three kingdoms tell,
And poets sing how these befell.
Their leader fallen, the rebels threw away their weapons and fled. The official
soldiers dashed in among them. Many thousands surrendered and the victory was
complete. Thus this part of the rebellion was broken up.
On their return, Liu Yan personally met them and distributed rewards. But the
next day, letters came from Imperial Protector Gong Jing of Qingzhou Region
saying that the rebels were laying siege to the chief city and it was near
falling. Help was needed quickly.
“I will go,” said Liu Bei as soon as he heard the news.
And he set out at once with his own soldiers, reinforced by a body of five
thousand under Zhou Jing. The rebels, seeing help coming, at once attacked most
fiercely. The relieving force being comparatively small could not prevail and
retired some ten miles, where they made a camp.
“They are many and we but few,” said Liu Bei to his brothers. “We can
only beat them by superior strategy.”
So they prepared an ambush. Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, each with a goodly party,
went behind the hills, right and left, and there hid. When the gongs beat they
were to move out to support the main army.
These preparations made, the drums rolled noisily for Liu Bei to advance. The
rebels also came forward. But Liu Bei suddenly retired. Thinking this was their
chance, the rebels pressed forward and were led over the hills. Then suddenly
the gongs sounded for the ambush. Guan Yu and Zhang Fei poured out from right
and left as Liu Bei faced around to meet the rebels. Under three-side attack,
the rebels lost heavily and fled to the walls of Qingzhou City. But Imperial
Protector Gong Jing led out an armed body to attack them, and the rebels were
entirely defeated and many slain. Qingzhou was no longer in danger.
Though fierce as tigers soldiers be,
Battles are won by strategy.
A hero comes; he gains renown,
Already destined for a crown.
After the celebrations in honor of victory were over, Commander Zhou Jing
proposed to return to Youzhou.
But Liu Bei said, “We are informed that Imperial Commander Lu Zhi has been
struggling with a horde of rebels led by Zhang Jue at Guangzong. Lu Zhi was
once my teacher, and I want to go help him.”
So Liu Bei and Zhou Jing separated, and the three brothers with their troops
made their way to Guangzong. They found Lu Zhi’s camp, were admitted to his
presence, and declared the reason of their coming. The Commander received them
with great joy, and they remained with him while he made his plans.
At that time Zhang Jue’s one hundred fifty thousand troops and Lu Zhi’s
fifty thousand troops were facing each other. Neither had had any success.
Lu Zhi said to Liu Bei, “I am able to surround these rebels here. But the
other two brothers, Zhang Ba and Zhang Lian, are strongly entrenched opposite
Huangfu Song and Zhu Jun at Yingchuan. I will give you a thousand more troops,
and with these you can go to find out what is happening, and we can then settle
the moment for concerted attack.”
So Liu Bei set off and marched as quickly as possible to Yingchuan. At that
time the imperial troops were attacking with success, and the rebels had
retired upon Changshe. They had encamped among the thick grass.
Seeing this, Huangfu Song said to Zhu Jun, “The rebels are camping in the
field. We can attack them by fire.”
So the Imperial Commanders bade every man cut a bundle of dry grass and laid an
ambush. That night the wind blew a gale, and at the second watch they started a
blaze. At the same time Huangfu Song and Zhu Jun’s troops attacked the rebels
and set their camp on fire. The flames rose to the very heaven. The rebels were
thrown into great confusion. There was no time to saddle horses or don armor:
They fled in all directions.
The battle continued until dawn. Zhang Lian and Zhang Ba, with a group of
flying rebels, found a way of escape. But suddenly a troop of soldiers with
crimson banners appeared to oppose them. Their leader was a man of medium
stature with small eyes and a long beard. He was Cao Cao, a Beijuo man, holding
the rank of Cavalry Commander. His father was Cao Song, but he was not really a
Cao. Cao Song had been born to the Xiahou family, but he had been brought up by
Eunuch Cao Teng and had taken this family name.
As a young man Cao Cao had been fond of hunting and delighted in songs and
dancing. He was resourceful and full of guile. An uncle, seeing the young
fellow so unsteady, used to get angry with him and told his father of his
misdeeds. His father remonstrated with him.
But Cao Cao made equal to the occasion. One day, seeing his uncle coming, he
fell to the ground in a pretended fit. The uncle alarmed ran to tell his
father, who came, and there was the youth in most perfect health.
“But your uncle said you were in a fit. Are you better?” said his father.
“I have never suffered from fits or any such illness,” said Cao Cao. “But
I have lost my uncle’s affection, and he has deceived you.”
Thereafter, whatever the uncle might say of his faults, his father paid no
heed. So the young man grew up licentious and uncontrolled.
A man of the time named Qiao Xuan said to Cao Cao, “Rebellion is at hand, and
only a man of the greatest ability can succeed in restoring tranquillity. That
man is yourself.”
And He Yong of Nanyang said of him, “The dynasty of Han is about to fall. He
who can restore peace is this man and only he.”
Cao Cao went to inquire his future of a wise man of Runan named Xu Shao.
“What manner of man am I?” asked Cao Cao.
The seer made no reply, and again and again Cao Cao pressed the question.
Then Xu Shao replied, “In peace you are an able subject; in chaos you are a
crafty hero!”
Cao Cao greatly rejoiced to hear this.
Cao Cao graduated at twenty and earned a reputation of piety and integrity. He
began his career as Commanding Officer in a county within the Capital District.
In the four gates of the city he guarded, he hung up clubs of various sorts,
and he would punish any breach of the law whatever the rank of the offender.
Now an uncle of Eunuch Jian Shuo was found one night in the streets with a
sword and was arrested. In due course he was beaten. Thereafter no one dared to
offend again, and Cao Cao’s name became heard. Soon he became a magistrate of
Dunqiu.
At the outbreak of the Yellow Scarves, Cao Cao held the rank of General and was
given command of five thousand horse and foot to help fight at Yingchuan. He
just happened to fall in with the newly defeated rebels whom he cut to pieces.
Thousands were slain and endless banners and drums and horses were captured,
together with huge sums of money. However, Zhang Ba and Zhang Lian got away;
and after an interview with Huangfu Song, Cao Cao went in pursuit of them.
Meanwhile Liu Bei and his brothers were hastening toward Yingchuan, when they
heard the din of battle and saw flames rising high toward the sky. But they
arrived too late for the fighting. They saw Huangfu Song and Zhu Jun to whom
they told the intentions of Lu Zhi.
“The rebel power is quite broken here,” said the commanders, “but they
will surely make for Guangzong to join Zhang Jue. You can do nothing better
than hasten back.”
The three brothers thus retraced their steps. Half way along the road they met
a party of soldiers escorting a prisoner in a cage-cart. When they drew near,
they saw the prisoner was no other than Lu Zhi, the man they were going to
help. Hastily dismounting, Liu Bei asked what had happened.
Lu Zhi explained, “I had surrounded the rebels and was on the point of
smashing them, when Zhang Jue employed some of his supernatural powers and
prevented my victory. The court sent down Eunuch Zhuo Feng to inquire into my
failure, and that official demanded a bribe. I told him how hard pressed we
were and asked him where, in the circumstances, I could find a gift for him. He
went away in wrath and reported that I was hiding behind my ramparts and would
not give battle and that I disheartened my army. So I was superseded by Dong
Zhuo, and I have to go to the capital to answer the charge.”
This story put Zhang Fei into a rage. He was for slaying the escort and setting
free Lu Zhi. But Liu Bei checked him.
“The government will take the due course,” said Liu Bei. “You must not
act hastily!”
And the escort and the three brothers went two ways.
It was useless to continue on that road to Guangzong, so Guan Yu proposed to go
back to Zhuo, and they retook the road. Two days later they heard the thunder
of battle behind some hills. Hastening to the top, they beheld the government
soldiers suffering great loss, and they saw the countryside was full of Yellow
Scarves. On the rebels’ banners were the words Zhang Jue the Lord of Heaven
written large.
“We will attack this Zhang Jue!” said Liu Bei to his brothers, and they
galloped out to join in the battle.
Zhang Jue had worsted Dong Zhuo and was following up his advantage. He was in
hot pursuit when the three brothers dashed into his army, threw his ranks into
confusion, and drove him back fifteen miles. Then the brothers returned with
the rescued general to his camp.
“What offices have you?” asked Dong Zhuo, when he had leisure to speak to
the brothers.
“None,” replied they.
And Dong Zhuo treated them with disrespect. Liu Bei retired calmly, but Zhang
Fei was furious.
“We have just rescued this menial in a bloody fight,” cried Zhang Fei,
“and now he is rude to us! Nothing but his death can slake my anger.”
Zhang Fei stamped toward Dong Zhuo’s tent, holding firmly a sharp sword.
As it was in olden time so it is today,
The simple wight may merit well,
Officialdom holds sway;
Zhang Fei, the blunt and hasty,
Where can you find his peer?
But slaying the ungrateful would
Mean many deaths a year.
Dong Zhuo’s fate will be unrolled in later chapters.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 2 ****
the Governor of Hedong, Dong Zhuo himself was arrogant and overbearing. But the
day he had treated Liu Bei with contumely had been his last, had not Liu Bei
and Guan Yu restrained their wrathful brother Zhang Fei.
“Remember he has the government commission,” said Liu Bei. “Who are we to
judge and slay?”
“It is bitter to take orders from such a wretch. I would rather slay him! You
may stay here if you wish to, but I will seek some other place,” said Zhang
Fei.
“We three are one in life and in death; there is no parting for us. We will
all go hence.”
So spoke Liu Bei, and his brother was satisfied. Wherefore all three set out
and lost no time in traveling until they came to Zhu Jun, who received them
well and accepted their aid in attacking Zhang Ba. At this time Cao Cao had
joined himself to Huangfu Song, and they were trying to destroy Zhang Lian, and
there was a great battle at Quyang.
Zhang Ba was commanding some eighty thousand troops. The rebel had led his army
to a strong position in the rear of the hills. An attack being decided upon,
Liu Bei was the van leader. On the rebel side a general of Zhang Ba, Gao Sheng,
came out to offer battle. Liu Bei sent Zhang Fei to smite Gao Sheng. Out rode
Zhang Fei at full speed, his spear ready set. After a few bouts Zhang Fei
wounded Gao Sheng, who was unhorsed. At this Liu Bei signaled the main army to
advance.
Then Zhang Ba, while still mounted, loosened his hair, grasped his sword, and
uttered his incantations. Thereupon began the wind to howl and the thunder to
roll, while a dense black cloud from the heavens settled upon the field. And
therein seemed to be horsemen and footmen innumerable, who swept to attack the
imperial troops. Fear came upon them, and Liu Bei led off his troops, but they
were in disorder and returned defeated.
Zhu Jun and Liu Bei considered the matter.
“Zhang Ba uses magic,” said Zhu Jun. “Tomorrow, then, will I prepare
counter magic in the shape of the blood of slaughtered swine and goats. This
blood shall be sprinkled upon their hosts from the precipices above by soldiers
in ambush. Thus shall we be able to break the power of their shamanic art.”
So it was done. Guan Yu and Zhang Fei took each a thousand troops and hid them
on the high cliffs behind the hills, and they had a plentiful supply of the
blood of swine and goats and all manners of filthy things. And so next day,
when the rebels with fluttering banners and rolling drums came out to
challenge, Liu Bei rode forth to meet them. At the same moment that the armies
met, again Zhang Ba began his magic and again the elements began to struggle
together. Sand flew in clouds, pebbles were swept along the ground, black
masses of vapor filled the sky, and rolling masses of foot and horse descended
from on high. Liu Bei turned, as before, to flee and the rebels rushed on. But
as they pressed through the hills, the trumpets blared, and the hidden soldiers
exploded bombs, threw down filth and spattered blood. The masses of soldiers
and horses in the air fluttered to the earth as fragments of torn paper, the
wind ceased to blow, the thunder subsided, the sand sank, and the pebbles lay
still upon the ground.
Zhang Ba quickly saw his magic had been countered and turned to retire. Then he
was attacked on the flanks by Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, and in rear by Liu Bei and
Zhu Jun. The rebels were routed. Liu Bei, seeing from afar the banner of Zhang
Ba The Lord of Earth, galloped toward it but only succeeded in wounding Zhang
Ba with an arrow in the left arm. Wounded though he was, Zhang Ba got away into
the city of Yangcheng, where he fortified himself and was besieged by Zhu Jun.
Scouts, sent out to get news of Huangfu Song, reported: “Commander Huangfu
Song had been very successful, and Dong Zhuo had suffered many reverses.
Therefore the court put Huangfu Song in the latter’s place. Zhang Jue had
died before Huangfu Song’s arrival. Zhang Lian had added his brother’s army
to his own, but no headway could be made against Huangfu Song, whose army
gained seven successive victories. And Zhang Lian was slain at Quyang. Beside
this, Zhang Jue’s coffin was exhumed, the corpse beheaded, and the head,
after exposure, was sent to Capital Luoyang. The common crowd had surrendered.
For these services Huangfu Song was promoted to General of the Flying Chariots
and the Imperial Protector of Jizhou.
“Huangfu Song did not forget his friends. His first act after he had attained
to power was to memorialize the Throne concerning the case of Lu Zhi, who was
then restored to his former rank for his meritorious conduct. Cao Cao also
received advancement for his services and is preparing to go to Jinan to his
new post.”
Hearing these things Zhu Jun pressed harder yet upon Yangcheng, and the
approaching break-up of the rebellion became evident. Then one of Zhang Ba’s
officers, Yan Zheng, killed his leader and brought the head in token of
submission. Thus rebellion in that part of the country was stamped out, and Zhu
Jun made his report to the government.
However, the embers of the Yellow Scarves still smoldered. Three other rebels,
Zhao Hong, Han Zhong, and Sun Zhong, gathered some thirty thousand rebels and
began to murder and rob and burn, calling themselves the avengers of Master
Zhang Jue.
The court commanded the successful Zhu Jun to lead his veteran and successful
troops to destroy the rebels. He at once marched toward the city of Wancheng
which the rebels were holding. When Zhu Jun arrived, Han Zhong went to oppose
him. Zhu Jun sent Liu Bei and his brothers to attack the southwest corner of
the city. Han Zhong at once led the best of his troops to defend the city.
Meanwhile Zhu Jun himself led two thousand of armored horsemen to attack the
opposite corner. The rebels, thinking the city being lost, abandoned the
southwest and turned back into the city to help the defenders. Liu Bei pressed
hotly in their rear, and they were utterly routed. They took refuge in the city
which was then invested. When famine pressed upon the besieged, they sent a
messenger to offer to surrender, but Zhu Jun refused the offer.
Said Liu Bei to Zhu Jun, “Seeing that the founder of the Han Dynasty, Liu
Bang the Supreme Ancestor, could welcome the submissive and receive the
favorable, why reject these?”
“The conditions are different,” replied Zhu Jun. “In those old days
disorder was universal and the people had no fixed lord. Wherefore submission
was welcomed and support rewarded to encourage people to come over. Now the
empire is united, and the Yellow Scarves are the only malcontents. To receive
their surrender is not to encourage the good. To allow brigands, when
successful, is to give way to every license, and to let them surrender when
they fail is to encourage brigandage. Your plan is not a good one.”
Liu Bei replied, “Not to let brigands surrender is well. But the city is
surrounded as by an iron barrel. If the rebels’ request be refused, they will
be desperate and fight to the death, and we can hardly withstand a myriad of
such men. Moreover, in the city there are many times that number, all doomed to
death. Let us withdraw from one corner and only attack the opposite. They will
all assuredly flee and have no desire to fight. We shall take them.”
Zhu Jun saw that the advice was good and followed it. As predicted the rebels
ran out, led by Han Zhong. The besiegers fell upon them as they fled, and Han
Zhong was slain. The rebels scattered in all directions. But the other two
rebel chieftains, Zhao Hong and Sun Zhong, came with large reinforcements, and
as they appeared very strong, the imperial soldiers retired, and the new body
of rebels reentered Wancheng.
Zhu Jun encamped three miles from the city and prepared to attack. Just then
there arrived a body of horse and foot from the east. At the lead was one
general with a broad open face, a body as an alert tiger’s, and a torso as a
lofty bear’s . His name was Sun Jian. He was a native of Fuchun in the old
state of Wu, a descendant of the famous Sun Zi the Strategist.
When he was seventeen, Sun Jian was with his father on the River Qiantang and
saw a party of pirates, who had been plundering a merchant, dividing their
booty on the river bank.
“We can capture these!” said he to his father.
So, gripping his sword, he ran boldly up the bank and cried out to this side
and that as if he was calling his men to come on. This made the pirates believe
the soldiers were on them and they fled, leaving their booty behind them. He
actually killed one of the pirates. In this way be became known and was
recommended for office.
Then, in collaboration with the local officials, he raised a band of one
thousand and helped to quell the rebellion of one Xu Chang, who called himself
the Sun Emperor and had ten thousand supporters. The rebel’s son Xu Hao was
also slain with his father. For this Sun Jian was commended by Imperial
Protector Zang Min in a memorial to the Throne, and he received further
promotion to the post of magistrate of Yandu, then of Xuyi, and then of Xiapi.
When the Yellow Scarves rebellion began, Sun Jian gathered together the youths
of his village, some of the merchant class, got a troop of one thousand five
hundred of veteran soldiers and took the field. Now he had reached the fighting
area.
Zhu Jun welcomed Sun Jian gladly and ordered him to attack the south gate of
Wancheng. The north and the west gates were simultaneously attacked by Liu Bei
and Zhu Jun, but the east gate was left free to give the rebels a chance of
exit. Sun Jian was the first to mount the wall and cut down more than twenty
rebels with his own sword. The rebels ran, but the leader Zhao Hong rode
directly at Sun Jian with his spear ready to thrust. Sun Jian leaped down from
the wall, snatched away the spear and with it knocked Zhao Hong from the horse.
Then Sun Jian, mounting Zhao Hong’s horse, rode hither and thither, slaying
as he went.
The rebels fled north. Meeting Liu Bei, they declined to fight and scattered.
But Liu Bei drew his bow, fitted an arrow, and shot their leader Sun Zhong, who
fell to the ground. The main army of Zhu Jun came up, and after tremendous
slaughter, the rebels surrendered. Thus was peace brought to the ten counties
about the Nanyang area.
Zhu Jun returned to Capital Luoyang, was promoted to the General of the Flying
Cavalry, and received the governorship of Henan. He did not forget those who
had helped him to win victory. Thus he reported the merits of Liu Bei and Sun
Jian to the Throne.
Sun Jian, having influential friends and connections to support him, quickly
got an appointment to a post of Commander of Changsha and went to assume the
new office. But Liu Bei, in spite of Zhu Jun’s memorial, waited in vain for
preferment, and the three brothers became very sad.
Walking along one day in the capital, Liu Bei met a court official, Zhang Jun,
to whom he related his services and told his sorrows. Zhang Jun was much
surprised at this neglect and one day at court spoke to the Emperor about it.
Said he, “The Yellow Scarves rebelled because the eunuchs sold offices and
bartered ranks. There was employment only for their friends, punishment only
for their enemies. This led to rebellion. Wherefore it would be well to slay
the Ten Eunuchs and expose their heads and proclaim what had been done
throughout the whole empire. Then reward the worthy. Thereby the land would be
wholly tranquil.”
But the eunuchs fiercely opposed this and said Zhang Jun was insulting the
Emperor, and the Emperor bade the guards thrust Zhang Jun out.
However, the eunuchs took counsel together and one said, “Surely someone who
rendered some service against rebels resents being passed over.”
So they caused a list of unimportant people to be prepared for preferment by
and by. Among them was Liu Bei, who received the post of magistrate of the
county of Anxi, to which he proceeded without delay after disbanding his army
and sending them home to their villages. He retained two dozens or so as
escort.
The three brothers reached Anxi, and soon the administration of the county was
so reformed and the rule so wise that in a month there was no law-breaking. The
three brothers lived in harmony, eating at the same table and sleeping on the
same couch. But when Liu Bei was in public sessions or in company of others,
Guan Yu and Zhang Fei would stand in attendance, were it even a whole day.
Four months after their arrival, there came out a general order for the
reduction of the number of military officers holding civil posts, and Liu Bei
began to fear that he would be among those thrown out. In due course the
inspecting official, Du Biao by name, arrived and was met at the boundary. But
to the polite obeisance of Liu Bei, he made no return, save a wave of his whip
as he sat on his horse. This made Guan Yu and Zhang Fei furious. But worse was
to follow.
When the inspector had arrived at his lodging, he took his seat on the dais,
leaving Liu Bei standing below. After a long time he addressed Liu Bei.
“Magistrate, what was your origin?”
Liu Bei replied, “I am descended from Prince Sheng of Zhongshan. Since my
first fight with the Yellow Scarves rebels at Zhuo County, I have been in some
thirty battles, wherein I gained some trifling merit. My reward was this
office.”
“You lie about your descent, and your statement of services is false!”
roared the inspector. “Now the court has ordered the reduction of your sort
of low class and corrupt officials.”
Liu Bei muttered to himself and withdrew. On his return to the magistracy, he
took council with his secretaries.
“This pompous attitude only means the inspector wants a bribe,” said they.
“I have never wronged the people to the value of a single coin: Then where is
a bribe to come from?”
Next day the inspector had the minor officials before him and forced them to
bear witness that their master had oppressed the people. Liu Bei time after
time went to rebut this charge, but the doorkeepers drove him away and he could
not enter.
Now Zhang Fei had been all day drowning his sorrow in wine and had drunk far
too much. Calling for his horse he rode out past the lodging of the inspector,
and at the gate saw a small crowd of white-haired people weeping bitterly. He
asked why.
They said, “The inspector has compelled the underlings to bear false witness
against our magistrate, with the desire to injure the virtuous Liu Bei. We came
to beg mercy for him but are not permitted to enter. Moreover, we have been
beaten by the doorkeepers.”
This provoked the irascible and half intoxicated Zhang Fei to fury. His eyes
opened wide until they became circles; he ground his teeth; in a moment he was
off his steed, had forced his way past the scared doorkeepers into the
building, and was in the rear apartments. There he saw Imperial Inspector Du
Biao sitting on high with the official underlings in bonds at his feet.
“Oppressor of the people, robber!” cried Zhang Fei. “Do you know me?”
But before the inspector could reply, Zhang Fei had had him by the hair and had
dragged him down. Another moment he was outside and firmly lashed to the
hitching post in front of the building. Then breaking off a switch from a
willow tree, Zhang Fei gave his victim a severe thrashing, only staying his
hand when the tenth switch was too short to strike with.
Liu Bei was sitting alone, communing with his sorrow, when he heard a shouting
before his door. He asked what the matter was.
They told him, “General Zhang Fei had bound somebody to a post and was
thrashing him!”
Hastily going outside, Liu Bei saw who the unhappy victim was and asked Zhang
Fei the reason.
“If we do not beat this sort of wretch to death, what may we expect?” said
Zhang Fei.
“Noble Sir, save me!” cried the inspector.
Now Liu Bei had always been kindly and gracious, wherefore he bade his brother
release the officer and go his way.
Then Guan Yu came up, saying, “Brother, after your magnificent services you
only got this petty post, and even here you have been insulted by this fellow.
A thorn bush is no place for a phoenix. Let us slay this fellow, leave here,
and go home till we can evolve a bigger scheme.”
Liu Bei contented himself with hanging the official seal about the
inspector’s neck, saying, “If I hear that you injure the people, I will
assuredly kill you. I now spare your life, and I return to you the seal. We are
going.”
The inspector went to the Governor of Dingzhou and complained, and orders were
issued for the arrest of the brothers, but they got away to Daizhou and sought
refuge with Liu Hu, who sheltered them because of Liu Bei’s noble birth.
By this time the Ten Regular Attendants had everything in their hands, and they
put to death all who did not stand in with them. From every officer who had
helped to put down the rebels they demanded presents; and if these were not
forthcoming, he was removed from office. Imperial Commanders Huangfu Song and
Zhu Jun both fell victims to these intrigues and were deprived from offices,
while on the other hand the eunuchs received the highest honors and rewards.
Thirteen eunuchs were ennobled, including Zhao Zhong who was added to the rank
of General of the Flying Cavalry. The government grew worse and worse, and
everyone was irritated.
Rebellions broke out in Changsha led by Ou Xing, and in Yuyang led by Zhang Ju
and Zhang Chun. Memorials were sent up in number as snow flakes in winter, but
the Ten suppressed them all. One day the Emperor was at a feast in one of the
gardens with the Ten, when Court Counselor Liu Tao suddenly appeared showing
very great distress. The Emperor asked what the matter was.
“Sire, how can you be feasting with these when the empire is at the last
gasp?” said Liu Tao.
“All is well,” said the Emperor. “Where is anything wrong?”
Said Liu Tao, “Robbers swarm on all sides and plunder the cities. And all is
the fault of the Ten Eunuchs who sell offices and injure the people, oppress
loyal officials and deceive their superiors. All virtuous ones have left the
services and returned to their places. Misfortune is before our very eyes!”
At this the eunuchs pulled off their hats and threw themselves at their
master’s feet.
“If Minister Liu Tao disapproves of us,” they said, “we are in danger. We
pray that our lives be spared and we may go to our farms. We yield our property
to help defray military expenses.”
And they wept bitterly.
The Emperor turned angrily to Liu Tao, saying, “You also have servants: Why
can’t you bear with mine?”
And thereupon the Emperor called to the guards to eject Liu Tao and put him to
death.
Liu Tao cried aloud, “My death matters nothing. The pity is that Han Dynasty,
after four centuries of reign, is falling fast!”
The guards hustled him away and were just about to carry out the Emperor’s
order when a minister stopped them, shouting, “Strike not! Wait till I have
spoken with His Majesty.”
It was the Minister of the Interior, Chen Dan. He went in to the Emperor, to
whom he said, “For what fault is Counselor Liu Tao to be put to death?”
“He has vilified my servants and has insulted me,” said the Emperor.
“All the empire would eat the flesh of the eunuchs if they could, and yet,
Sire, you respect them as if they were your parents. They have no merit, but
they are created nobles. Moreover, Feng Xu was in league with the Yellow
Scarves. Unless Your Majesty looks to it, the state will crumble!”
“There was no proof against Feng Xu,” replied the Emperor. “About the Ten
Eunuchs, are there none faithful among them?”
Chen Dan beat his forehead on the steps of the throne and did not desist from
remonstrance. Then the Emperor grew angry and commanded his removal and
imprisonment with Liu Tao. That night Liu Tao and Chen Dan were murdered.
Then the eunuchs sent a forged edict to Sun Jian making him Governor of
Changsha, with orders to suppress the rebellion of Ou Xing. In less than two
months Sun Jian reported the county all tranquil. For this he was created Lord
of Wucheng.
Further, Liu Yu was made Imperial Protector of Youzhou to move against Yuyang
and suppress Zhang Ju and Zhang Chun. Liu Hu of Daizhou recommended Liu Bei to
Liu Yu. Liu Yu welcomed Liu Bei and gave him rank of Commander and sent him
against the rebels. He fought with and worsted them and entirely broke their
spirit. Zhang Chun was cruel, and his leaders turned against him. One of his
officers then slew him and brought in his head, after which the others
submitted. The other leader Zhang Ju saw that all was lost and killed himself.
Yuyang being now tranquil, Liu Bei’s services were reported to the Throne,
and he received full pardon for the insult to the imperial inspector. He was
made Deputy Magistrate of Xiami, then Commanding Officer of Gaotang. Then
Gongsun Zan praised Liu Bei’s former services, and he was promoted to
Magistrate of Pingyuan. This place was very prosperous, and Liu Bei recovered
something of his old manner before the days of adversity. Liu Yu also received
preferment and was promoted to Grand Commander.
In the summer of the six year of Central Stability (AD 189), Emperor Ling
became seriously ill and summoned He Jin into the Palace to arrange for the
future. He Jin had sprung from a humble family of butchers, but his sister had
become a concubine of rank and borne a son to the Emperor, named Liu Bian.
After this she became Empress He, and He Jin became the powerful Regent
Marshal.
The Emperor had also greatly loved a beautiful girl, Lady Wang, who had borne
him a son named Liu Xian. Empress He had poisoned Lady Wang from jealousy, and
the baby had been given into the care of Empress Dong, who was the mother of
Emperor Ling. Lady Dong was the wife of Liu Chang, Lord of Jiedu. As time went
on and the Emperor Huan had no son of his own, he adopted the son of Liu Chang,
who succeeded as the Emperor Ling. After his accession, Emperor Ling had taken
his own mother into the Palace to live and had conferred upon her the title of
Empress Dowager.
Empress Dong had always tried to persuade her son to name Liu Xian as the Heir
Apparent, and in fact the Emperor greatly loved the boy and was disposed to do
as his mother desired.
When his end was near, one of the eunuchs, Jian Shuo, said, “If Liu Xian is
to succeed, He Jin must be killed to prevent any countermeasure.”
The Emperor saw this too. And he summoned He Jin to come to him.
But at the very gate of the Forbidden City, He Jin was warned of his danger by
Commander Pan Yin who said, “This must be a trap of Jian Shuo to destroy
you!”
He Jin rushed back to his quarters and called many of the ministers to his
side, and they met to consider how to put the eunuchs to death.
At this assembly a man spoke against the plot, “The influence of the eunuchs
dates back a century and a half, during the reigns of Emperors Chong and Zhi.
It has spread like a noxious weed in all directions. How can we hope to destroy
it? Above all keep this plot secret, or our whole clans will be
exterminated.”
He Jin eyed down and saw General of Military Standards Cao Cao.
He Jin was very angry at this speech and cried, “What do inferiors like you
know of the ways of government?”
And in the midst of the confusion Pan Yin came to say: “The Emperor is no
more. The eunuchs have decided to keep the death a secret and forge a command
to the Regent Marshal to come into the Palace to settle the succession.
Meanwhile to prevent trouble they have inscribed the name of Prince Xian on the
roll.”
And as Pan Yin finished speaking, the edict arrived summoning He Jin.
“The matter for the moment is to set up the rightful heir,” said Cao Cao.
“We can deal with the traitors later.”
“Who dare to join me in supporting the rightful heir —-Prince Bian?”
asked He Jin, the Regent Marshal.
At once one stood forward, crying, “Give me five thousand veterans, and we
will break into the Palace, set up the true heir, slay the eunuchs, and sweep
clean the government! Then peace will come to the empire.”
The energetic speaker was Yuan Shao, son of the former Minister of the Interior
Yuan Feng and nephew of Imperial Guardian Yuan Wei. Yuan Shao then held the
rank of Imperial Commander.
He Jin mustered five thousand royal guards. Yuan Shao put on complete armor and
took command. He Jin, supported by He Yong, Xun You, Zheng Tai, and more than
thirty other ministers and high-rank officials, went into the Palace. In the
hall where lay the coffin of the late Emperor, they placed Liu Bian on the
throne. After the ceremony was over and all had bowed before the new Emperor,
Yuan Shao went in to arrest Eunuch Jian Shuo. Jian Shuo in terror fled into the
Palace garden and hid among the shrubs, where he was discovered and murdered by
Guo Sheng, one of the Ten Eunuchs. The guards under Jian Shuo’s command all
surrendered.
Yuan Shao said, “Their gangs have broken. The most opportune moment is now to
slay all the eunuchs!”
But Zhang Rang and the eunuchs of the Ten scented the danger and rushed to see
Empress He.
They said, “The originator of the plan to injure your brother was Jian Shuo:
Only he was concerned and no other. Now the Regent Marshal, on Yuan Shao’s
advice, wishes to slay everyone of us. We implore your pity, O Your Majesty!”
“Fear not!” said Empress He, whose son had just become Emperor, “I will
protect you.”
She sent for her brother, and said, “You and I are of lowly origin, and we
owe our good fortune to the eunuchs. The misguided Jian Shuo is now dead, and
need you really put all the others to death as Yuan Shao advises?”
And He Jin obeyed her wish. He explained to his party, saying, “The real
offender, Jian Shuo, has met his fate, and his clan will be punished. But we
need not exterminate the whole party nor injure his colleagues.”
“Slay them, root and branch,” cried Yuan Shao, “or they will ruin you!”
“I have decided,” said He Jin, coldly. “Say no more.”
Within a few days He Jin became Chair of the Secretariat, and his associates
received high offices.
Now Empress Dong summoned the eunuch Zhang Rang and his party to a council.
Said she, “It was I who first brought forward the sister of He Jin. Today her
son is on the throne, and all the officials are her friends, and her influence
is enormous. What can we do?”
Zhang Rang replied, “Your Highness should administer the state from ‘behind
the veil’; create the late Emperor’s son Liu Xian a prince; give your
brother, the Imperial Uncle Dong Chong, a high rank, and place him over the
army; and use us. That will do it.”
Empress Dong approved. Next day she held a court and issued an edict in the
sense proposed. She made Liu Xian Prince of Chenliu and Dong Chong General of
the Flying Cavalry, and she allowed the eunuchs again to participate state
affairs.
When Empress He saw this, she prepared a banquet to which she invited her rival
Empress Dong.
In the middle of the feast, when all were well warmed with wine, Empress He
rose and offered a cup to her guest, saying, “It is not fitting that we two
should meddle in state affairs. In the beginning of the Han Dynasty, when
Empress Lu laid hands upon the government, all her clans were put to death. We
ought to remain content, immured in our palaces, and leave state affairs to the
state officials. That would be well for the country, and I trust you will act
thus.”
But Empress Dong only got angry, saying, “You poisoned Lady Wang out of
jealousy. Now, relying upon the fact that your son sits on the throne and that
your brother is powerful, you speak these wild words. I will command that your
brother be beheaded, and that can be done as easily as I turn my hand!”
Empress He in her turn became wroth and said, “I tried to persuade you with
fair words. Why get so angry?”
“You low born daughter of a butcher, what do you know of offices?” cried
Empress Dong.
And the quarrel waxed hot.
The eunuchs persuaded the ladies to retire. But in the night Empress He
summoned her brother into the Palace and told him what had occurred. He went
out and took counsel with the principal officers of state. Next morning a court
was held and a memorial was presented, saying:
“Empress Dong, being the foster mother of Liu Xian, Prince of Chenliu, a
regional prince —-only a collateral —-cannot properly occupy any part of
the Palace. She is to be removed into her original fief of Hejian and is to
depart immediately.”
And while they sent an escort to remove Empress Dong, a strong guard was placed
about the Imperial Uncle Dong Chong’s dwelling. They took away his seal of
office and he, knowing this was the end, killed himself in his private
apartments. His dependents, who wailed his death, were driven off by the
guards.
The eunuchs Zhang Rang and Duan Gui, having lost their patroness, sent large
gifts to He Jin’s younger brother, He Miao, and his mother, Lady Wuyang, and
thus got them to put in a good word to Empress He so as to gain her protection.
And so they gained favor once more at court.
In the sixth month of that year, the secret emissaries of He Jin poisoned
Empress Dong in her residence in the country. Her remains were brought to the
capital and buried in Wen Tombs. He Jin feigned illness and did not attend the
funeral.
Commander Yuan Shao went one day to see He Jin, saying, “The two eunuchs,
Zhang Rang and Duan Gui, are spreading the report outside that you have caused
the death of the late empress and is aiming at the throne. This is an excuse
for you to destroy them. Do not spare them this time, or you will pay like Dou
Wu and Chen Fan, who in the previous reign missed their chance because the
secret had not been kept, and they paid by their own deaths. Now you and your
brother have many commanders and officers behind, so that the destruction of
the eunuchs can be but an ease. It is a heaven-sent opportunity. Delay no
further!”
But He Jin replied, “Let me think it over.”
He Jin’s servants overheard the discussion and secretly informed the intended
victims, who sent further gifts to the younger brother He Miao.
Corrupted by these, He Miao went in to speak with his sister Empress He and
said, “The General is the chief support of the new Emperor, yet he is not
gracious and merciful but thinks wholly of slaughter. If he slays the eunuchs
without cause, it may bring about revolution.”
Soon after He Jin entered and told her of his design to put the eunuchs to
death.
She argued with him, “Those officials look after palace affairs and are old
servants. To kill the old servants just after the death of their master would
appear disrespectful to the dynasty’s ancestral temple.”
And as He Jin was of a vacillating mind, he murmured assent and left her.
“What about it?” said Yuan Shao on meeting him.
“She will not consent. What can be done?”
“Call up an army and slay them. It is imperative. Never mind her consent!”
“That is an excellent plan,” said He Jin. And he sent orders all round to
march soldiers to the capital.
But Secretary Chen Lin objected, “Nay! Do not act without due consideration.
The proverb says ‘To cover the eyes and snatch at swallows is to fool
oneself.’ If in so small a matter you cannot attain your wish, what of great
affairs? Now by virtue of the emperor and with the army under your hand, you
are like prancing tiger and soaring dragon: You may do as you please. To use
such enormous powers against the eunuchs would bring victory as easily as
lighting up a furnace to burn a hair. You only need to act promptly: Use your
powers and smite at once, and all the empire will be with you. But to summon
forces to the capital, to gather many bold warlords into one spot, each with
different schemes, is to turn our weapons against our own person, to place
ourselves in the power of another. Nothing but failure can come of it, and
havoc will ensue.”
“The view of a mere book-worm,” said He Jin with a smile.
Then one of those about He Jin suddenly clapped his hands, laughing, “Solving
this issue is as easy as turning over one’s hand! Why so much talk?”
The speaker was Cao Cao.
Wouldst thou withdraw wicked people from thy prince’s side,
Then seek counsel of the wise people of the state.
What Cao Cao said will be disclosed in later chapters.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 3 ****
What Cao Cao said was this: “The eunuch evil is of very old standing, but the
real cause of the present trouble is in the improper influence allowed them by
the emperors and the misplaced favoritism they have enjoyed. But a gaoler would
be ample force to employ against this kind of evil, and getting rid of the main
culprits is quite enough. Why increase confusion by summoning troops from the
regions? Any desire to slay all of them will speedily become known, and the
plan will fail.”
“Then, Cao Cao, you have some scheme of your own to further,” said He Jin
with a sneer.
Cao Cao left the meeting, proclaiming, “The one who throws the world into
chaos is He Jin!”
Then He Jin sent swift, secret letters far and wide to several bases.
It must be recalled that Dong Zhuo had failed in his attempt to destroy the
Yellow Scarves rebellion. He would have been punished if he had not bribed the
Ten Eunuchs heavily for their protection. Later, through connections in the
capital, he obtained rapid promotions from General to General of the Front
Army, to Lord of Aoxiang, to Imperial Protector in the western region of Xizhou
and Commander of an army of two hundred thousand troops. But Dong Zhuo was
treacherous and disloyal at heart. So when he received the summons to the
capital, he rejoiced greatly and lost no time in obeying it. He left a son-in-
law, Imperial Commander Niu Fu, to look after the affairs of Xizhou and set out
for Luoyang. Dong Zhuo took with him a huge army and four generals —-Li Jue,
Guo Si, Zhang Ji, and Fan Chou.
Dong Zhuo’s adviser and son-in-law, Li Ru, said, “Though a formal summons
has come, there are many obscurities in it. It would be well to send up a
memorial stating plainly our aims and intentions. Then we can proceed.”
So Dong Zhuo composed something like this:
“Thy servant knows that the continual rebellions owe their origin to Zhang
Rang and the Regular Attendants of the Inner Bureau, who act counter to all
recognized precepts. Now to stop the ebullition of a pot the best way is to
withdraw the fire; to cut out an abscess, though painful, is better than to
nourish the evil. I have dared undertake a military advance on the capital,
with thy permission, and now pray that Zhang Rang and the other eunuchs be
removed for the happiness of the dynasty and of the empire.”
He Jin read this memorial and showed it to his partisans.
Then said Minister Zheng Tai, “A fierce wild beast: If he comes, his prey
will be humans!”
He Jin replied, “You are too timorous: You are unequal to great schemes.”
But Lu Zhi also said, “Long have I known this man. In appearance innocent, he
is a very wolf at heart. Let him in, and calamity enters with him. Stop him, do
not let him come, and thus will you avoid upheaval.”
He Jin was obstinate, and both Zheng Tai and Lu Zhi gave up their posts and
retired, as did more than half the ministers of state, while He Jin sent a warm
welcome to Dong Zhuo, who soon camped at Shengchi Lake and stationed there
without further action.
Zhang Rang and the eunuchs knew this move was directed against them and said,
“This is He Jin’s plot. If we do not strike first, our whole clans shall be
exterminated.”
So they hid a band of fifty armed ruffians at the Gate of Grand Virtue in the
Palace of Happiness, where the Empress lived, then they went in to see her.
They said, “The General, feigning to act under command, has called up armies
to the capital to destroy us. We pray you, Your Majesty, pity and save us!”
“Go to the General and confess your faults,” said the Empress.
“If we did, then should we be cut to mincemeat! Rather summon the General
into your presence and command him to cease. If he will not, then we pray but
die in your presence.”
Empress He issued the requisite command.
He Jin was just going to her when Secretary Chen Lin advised him not to enter,
saying, “The eunuchs are certainly behind the order and mean your harm.”
But He Jin could only see the command of the Empress and was oblivious to all
else. Said he, “Clearly, this is an edict from the Empress. What harm?”
“Our plot is no longer a secret,” said Yuan Shao. “Still you may go if
you are ready to fight your way in.”
“Get the eunuchs out first!” said Cao Cao.
“Silly children!” said He Jin. “What can they do against the man who
holds the forces of the empire in his palm?”
Yuan Shao said, “If you will go, then we will come as a guard, just as a
precaution.”
Whereupon both Yuan Shao and Cao Cao chose five hundred best men under their
command, at whose head they placed Yuan Shu, a brother of Yuan Shao. Yuan Shu,
clad in mail, drew up his troops outside the Forbidden City’s entrance, while
Yuan Shao and Cao Cao, holding swords, went as escort.
When He Jin neared the Palace of Happiness, the officers from the Inner Bureau
said, “The orders are to admit the Regent Marshal and none other.”
So the escort was detained outside. He Jin went in proudly. At the Gate of
Grand Virtue, he was met by Zhang Rang and Duan Gui, and their followers
quickly closed in around him. He Jin began to feel alarmed.
Then Zhang Rang in a harsh voice began to revile him: “What crime had Empress
Dong committed that she should have been put to death? And when the Mother of
the Country was buried, who feigned sickness and did not attend? We raised you
and your paltry, huckstering family to all the dignity and wealth you have, and
this is your gratitude! You would slay us. You call us sordid and dirty: Who is
the cleaner?”
He Jin was panic stricken and looked about for a way to escape, but all gates
had been shut. The eunuchs closed him in, and then the assassins appeared and
cut He Jin into halves.
Closing the days of the Hans, and the years of their rule were near spent,
Stupid and tactless was He Jin, yet stood he highest in office,
Many were they who advised him, but he was deaf as he heard not,
Wherefore fell he a victim under the swords of the eunuchs.
So He Jin died. Yuan Shao and Cao Cao waited long. By and by, impatient at the
delay, they called through the gate, “Thy carriage awaits, O General!”
For reply the head of He Jin was flung over the wall. A decree was proclaimed:
“He Jin has contemplated treachery and therefore has been slain! It pardons
his adherents.”
Yuan Shao shouted, “The eunuchs have slain the High Minister. Let those who
will slay this wicked party come and help me!”
Then one of He Jin’s generals, Wu Kuang, set fire to the gate. Yuan Shu at
the head of his guards burst in and fell to slaying the eunuchs without regard
to age or rank. Yuan Shao and Cao Cao broke into the inner part of the Palace.
Four of the eunuchs —-Zhao Zhong, Cheng Kuang, Xia Yun, and Guo Sheng —-
fled to the Blue Flower Lodge where they were hacked to pieces. Fire raged,
destroying the buildings.
Four of the Ten Regular Attendants —-Zhang Rang, Duan Gui, Cao Jie, and Hou
Lan —-led by Zhang Rang carried off the Empress, Emperor Bian, and Prince
Xian of Chenliu toward the North Palace.
Lu Zhi, since he had resigned office, was at home, but hearing of the
revolution in the Palace he donned his armor, took his spear, and prepared to
fight.
He saw Eunuch Duan Gui hurrying the Empress along and called out, “You rebel,
how dare you abduct the Empress?”
The eunuch fled. The Empress leaped out of a window and was taken to a place of
safety.
General Wu Kuang burst into one of the inner halls where he found He Miao,
sword in hand.
“You also were in the plot to slay your own brother,” cried Wu Kuang.
“You shall die with the others!”
“Let us kill the plotter against his elder brother!” cried many.
He Miao looked around: His enemies hemmed him in on every side. He was hacked
to pieces.
Yuan Shu bade his soldiers scatter and seek out all the families of the
eunuchs, sparing none. In that slaughter many beardless men were killed in
error.
Cao Cao set himself to extinguish the fires. He then begged Empress He to
undertake the direction of affairs, and soldiers were sent to pursue Zhang Rang
and rescue the young Emperor and the young Prince of Chenliu.
Meanwhile, Zhang Rang and Duan Gui had hustled away the Emperor and the Prince.
They burst through the smoke and fire and traveled without stopping till they
reached the Beimang Hills. It was then the third watch. They heard a great
shouting behind them and saw soldiers in pursuit. Their leader, Min Gong, a
commander in Henan, was shouting, “Traitors, stop, stop!”
Zhang Rang, seeing that he was lost, jumped into the river, where he was
drowned.
The two boys ignorant of the meaning of all this confusion and terrified out of
their senses, dared not utter a cry. They crept in among the rank grass on the
river bank and hid. The soldiers scattered in all directions but failed to find
them. So they remained till the fourth watch, shivering with cold from the
drenching dew and very hungry. They lay down in the thick grass and wept in
each other’s arms, silently, lest anyone should discover them.
“This is no a place to stay in,” said Prince Xian. “We must find some way
out.”
So the two children knotted their clothes together and managed to crawl up the
bank. They were in a thicket of thorn bushes, and it was quite dark. They could
not see any path. They were in despair when, all at once, millions of fireflies
sprang up all about them and circled in the air in front of the Emperor.
“God is helping us,” said Prince Xian.
They followed whither the fireflies led and gradually got into a road. They
walked till their feet were too sore to go further, when, seeing a heap of
straw near the road, they crept to it and lay down.
This heap of straw was close to a farm house. In the night, as the farmer was
sleeping, he saw in a vision two bright red suns drop behind his dwelling.
Alarmed by the portent, he hastily dressed and went forth to look about him.
Then he saw a bright light shooting up from a heap of straw. He hastened
thither and then saw two youths lying behind it.
“To what household do you belong, young gentlemen?” asked the farmer.
The Emperor was too frightened to reply, but his companion said, “He is the
Emperor. There was a revolution in the Forbidden City, and we ran away. I am
his brother, Prince of Chenliu.”
The farmer bowed again and again and said, “My name is Cui Yi. My brother Cui
Lie is the former Minister of the Interior. My brother was disgusted with the
behavior of the eunuchs and so resigned and hid away here.”
The two lads were taken into the farm, and their host on his knees served them
with refreshment.
It has been said that Min Gong had gone in pursuit of Eunuch Duan Gui. By and
by Min Gong overtook Duan Gui and cried, “Where is the Emperor?”
“He disappeared! I do not know where he is!”
Min Gong slew Duan Gui and hung the bleeding head on his horse’s neck. Then
he sent his troops searching in all directions, and he rode off by himself on
the same quest. Presently he came to the farm. Cui Yi, seeing what hung on his
horse’s neck, questioned him and, satisfied with his story, led him to the
Emperor. The meeting was affecting. All were moved to tears.
“The state cannot be without its ruler,” said Min Gong. “I pray Your
Majesty return to the city.”
At the farm they had but one sorry nag and this they saddled for the Emperor.
The young Prince was taken on Min Gong’s charger. And thus they left the
farm. Not beyond one mile from the farm, they fell in with other officials and
several hundred guards and soldiers made up an imposing cavalcade. In the
cavalcade were Wang Yun, Minister of the Interior; Yang Biao, Grand Commander;
Chunyu Qiong, Commander of the Left Army; Zhao Meng, Commander of the Right
Army; Bao Xin, Commander of the Rear Army; and Yuan Shao, Commander of the
Center Army. Tears were shed freely as the ministers met their Emperor.
A man was sent on in front to the capital there to expose the head of Eunuch
Duan Gui.
As soon as they could, they placed the Emperor on a better steed and the young
Prince had a horse to himself. Thus the Emperor returned to Luoyang, and so it
happened after all as the street children’s ditty ran:
Though the emperor doesn’t rule, though the prince no office fills,
Yet a brilliant cavalcade comes along from Beimang Hills.
The cavalcade had not proceeded far when they saw coming towards them a large
body of soldiers with fluttering banners hiding the sun and raising a huge
cloud of dust. The officials turned pale, and the Emperor was greatly alarmed.
Yuan Shao rode out in advance.
“Who are you?” said Yuan Shao.
From under the shade of an embroidered banner rode out a leader, saying, “Do
you have the Emperor?”
The Emperor was too panic stricken to respond, but the Prince of Chenliu rode
to the front and cried, “Who are you?”
“Dong Zhuo, Imperial Protector of Xizhou Region.”
“Have you come to protect the Chariot or to steal it?” said Prince Xian.
“I have come to protect,” said Dong Zhuo.
“If that is so, the Emperor is here: Why do you not dismount?”
Dong Zhuo hastily dismounted and made obeisance on the left of the road. Then
Prince Xian spoke graciously to him. From first to last the Prince had carried
himself most perfectly so that Dong Zhuo in his heart admired his behavior, and
then arose the first desire to set aside the Emperor in favor of the Prince of
Chenliu.
They reached the Palace the same day, and there was an affecting interview with
Empress He.
But when they had restored order in the Palace, the Imperial Hereditary Seal,
the special seal of the Emperor, was missing.
Dong Zhuo camped without the walls, but every day he was to be seen in the
streets with an escort of mailed soldiers so that the common people were in a
state of constant trepidation. He also went in and out of the Palace careless
of all the rules of propriety.
Commander of the Rear Army Bao Xin spoke of Dong Zhuo’s behavior to Yuan
Shao, saying, “This man harbors some evil design and should be removed.”
“Nothing can be done till the government is more settled,” said Yuan Shao.
Then Bao Xin saw Minister of the Interior Wang Yun and asked what he thought.
“Let us talk it over,” was the reply.
Bao Xin said no more but he left the capital and retired to the Taishan
Mountains.
Dong Zhuo induced the soldiers of the two brothers He Jin and He Miao to join
his command, and privately spoke to his adviser Li Ru about deposing the
Emperor in favor of the Prince of Chenliu.
“The government is really without a head. There can be no better time than
this to carry out your plan. Delay will spoil all. Tomorrow assemble the
officials in the Wenming Garden and address them on the subject. Put all
opponents to death, and your prestige is settled.”
So spoke Li Ru, and the words pleased Dong Zhuo mightily.
So the next day Dong Zhuo spread a feast and invited many guests. As all the
officers went in terror of him, no one dared be absent. Dong Zhuo himself rode
up to the garden last of all and took his place with his sword girded on. When
the wine had gone round several times, Dong Zhuo stopped the service and the
music and began to speak.
“I have something to say. Listen quietly all of you!”
All turned towards him.
“The emperor is lord of all. If he lacks dignity and behaves in an unseemly
manner, he is no fitting inheritor of the ancestral prerogatives. He who is now
on the throne is a weakling, inferior to the Prince of Chenliu in intelligence
and love of learning. The Prince is in every way fitted for the throne. I
desire to depose the Emperor and set up the Prince in his place. What think
you?”
The assembly listened in perfect silence, none daring at first to utter a word
of dissent. But one dared; for suddenly a guest stood up in his place, smote
the table and cried.
“No! No! Who are you that you dare utter such bold words? The Emperor is son
of the late Emperor and has done no wrong. Why then should he be deposed? Are
you a rebel?”
The speaker was Ding Yuan, Imperial Protector of Bingzhou.
Dong Zhuo glared at Ding Yuan, roaring, “There is life for those who are with
me, death for those against!”
Dong Zhuo drew his sword and made for the objector. But the watchful Li Ru had
noticed standing behind Ding Yuan a particularly dangerous looking henchman of
his, who was now handling his halberd threateningly, and whose eyes were
blazing with anger.
So Li Ru hastily interposed, saying, “But this is the banquet chamber, and
state affairs should be left outside. The matters can be fully discussed
tomorrow.”
His fellow guests persuaded Ding Yuan to leave, and after his departure Dong
Zhuo said, “Is what I said just and reasonable?”
“You are mistaken, Illustrious Sir,” said Lu Zhi. “Of old Emperor Tai Jia
of the Shang Dynasty was unenlightened. Wherefore the sage Minister Yi Yin
immured him in the Tong Palace till he reformed. Later the Prince of Changyi
ascended the throne, and in twenty-seven days he committed more than three
thousand categorical faults. Wherefore Regent Marshal Huo Guang declared in the
ancestral temple that the Prince of Changyi was deposed. Our present Emperor is
young, but he is intelligent, benevolent, and wise. He has not committed a
single fault. You, Sir, are an imperial protector of a frontier region and not
a metropolitan official and have had no experience in state administration.
Neither have you the pure intentions of Yi Yin and Huo Guang which qualified
their actions. The Teacher said: ‘Only with Yi Yin’s purpose can one act
like Yi Yin. Otherwise, such a deed is treason.’”
Dong Zhuo angrily drew his sword to slay the bold Lu Zhi, but two other
officials remonstrated.
“Minister Lu Zhi is the cynosure of the whole country, and his violent death
would stir the hearts of all people!” said Court Counselors Cai Yong and Peng
Bo.
Dong Zhuo then stayed his hand.
Then said Wang Yun, “A great question like the deposition and substitution of
emperors is not one to be decided after a wine party. Let it be put off till
another time.”
So the guests dispersed. Dong Zhuo stood at the gate with drawn sword watching
them depart. Standing thus, Dong Zhuo noticed a spearman galloping to and fro
on a fiery steed and asked Li Ru who that was.
“That is Lu Bu, the adopted son of Ding Yuan. You must keep out of his way,
my lord.”
Dong Zhuo went inside the gate so that he could not be seen. But next day they
reported to him that Ding Yuan had come out of the city with a small army and
was challenging to a battle. Dong Zhuo, with his army, went forth to accept the
challenge. And the two armies were drawn up in proper array.
Lu Bu was a conspicuous figure in the forefront. His hair was arranged under a
handsome headdress of gold, and he had donned a embroidered thousand-flower
fighting robe, a pheasant-tailed helmet, and breast plate, and round his waist
was a gleaming jade belt with a lion’s head clasp. With spear set he rode
close behind his master Ding Yuan.
Ding Yuan, riding forth, pointing his finger at Dong Zhuo, began to revile him.
“Unhappy indeed was this state when the eunuchs became so powerful that the
people were as if trodden into the mire under their feet. Now you, devoid of
the least merit, dare to talk of deposing the rightful emperor and setting up
another. This is to desire rebellion and no less!”
Dong Zhuo could not reply for Lu Bu, eager for the fight, rode straight at him.
Dong Zhuo fled and Ding Yuan’s army came on. The battle went in Ding Yuan’s
favor, and the beaten troops retired ten miles and made another camp. Here Dong
Zhuo called his officers to a council.
“This Lu Bu is a marvel,” said Dong Zhuo. “If he were only on my side, I
would defy the whole world!”
At this a man advanced saying, “Be content, O my lord! I am a fellow villager
of his and know him well: He is valorous, but not crafty; he will let go
principles, when he sees advantages. With this little, blarneying tongue of
mine, I can persuade him to put up his hands and come over to your side.”
Dong Zhuo was delighted and gazed admiringly at the speaker. It was Li Su, a
general in the Imperial Tiger Army.
“What arguments will you use with him?” asked Dong Zhuo.
“You have a fine horse, Red Hare, one of the best ever bred. I must have this
steed, and gold and pearls to win his heart. Then will I go and persuade him.
He will certainly abandon Ding Yuan’s service for yours.”
“What think you?” said Dong Zhuo to his adviser Li Ru.
“One cannot grudge a horse to win an empire,” was the reply.
So they gave Li Su what he demanded —-a thousand ounces of gold, ten strings
of beautiful pearls, a jeweled belt, and Red Hare —-and these accompanied Li
Su on his visit to his fellow villager.
Li Su reached the camp and said to the guard, “Please tell General Lu Bu that
a very old friend has come to visit him.”
He was admitted forthwith.
“Worthy brother, have you been well since we last met?” greeted Li Su while
bowing.
“How long it is since we last saw each other!” replied Lu Bu, bowing in
return. “And where are you now?”
“I am a general in the Imperial Tiger Army. When I learned you were a strong
supporter of the Throne, I could not say how I rejoiced. I have come now to
present to you a really fine horse, a three-hundred-mile-a-day horse, one that
crosses rivers and goes up mountains as if they were the level plain. Its name
is Red Hare. It will be a fitting aid to your valor.”
Lu Bu bade his guards lead out the horse. It was of a uniform color like
glowing-sun red —-not a hair of another color. It measured ten spans from
head to tail and from hoof to neck eight spans. When it neighed, the sound
filled the empyrean and shook the ocean.
Mark ye the steed swift and tireless, see the dust, spurned by his hoofs,
rising in clouds,
Now it swims the river, anon climbs the hill, rending the purple mist asunder,
Scornful it breaks the rein, shakes from its head the jeweled bridle,
It is as a fiery dragon descending from the highest heaven.
Lu Bu was delighted with the horse and said, “What return can I hope to make
for such a creature?”
“What return can I hope for? I came to you out of a sense of what is
right,” replied Li Su.
Wine was brought in and they drank.
“We have seen very little of each other, but I am constantly meeting your
honorable father,” said Li Su.
“You are drunk,” said Lu Bu. “My father has been dead for years.”
“Not so; I spoke of Ding Yuan, the man of the day.”
Lu Bu started. “Yes, I am with him, but only because I can do no better.”
“Sir, your talent is higher than the heavens, deeper than the seas. Who in
all the world does not bow before your name? Fame and riches and honors are
yours for the taking. And you say you can do no better than remain a
subordinate!”
“If I could only find a master to serve,” said Lu Bu.
“The clever bird chooses the branch whereon to perch; the wise servant
selects the master to serve. Seize the chance when it comes, for repentance
ever comes too late.”
“Now you are in the government. Who think you is really the bravest of
all?”, asked Lu Bu.
“I despise the whole lot except Dong Zhuo. He is one who respects wisdom and
reveres scholarship; he is discriminating in his rewards and punishments.
Surely he is destined to be a really great man.”
Lu Bu said, “I wish that I could serve him, but there is no way, I fear.”
Then Li Su produced his pearls and gold and the jeweled belt and laid them out
before his host.
“What is this? What does it mean?” said Lu Bu.
“Send away the attendants,” requested Li Su. And he went on, “Dong Zhuo
has long respected your bravery and sent these by my hand. Red Hare was also
from him.”
“But, if he loves me like this, what can I do in return?”
Li Su said, “If a stupid fellow like me can be a general in the Imperial
Tiger Army, it is impossible to say what honors await you.”
“I am sorry I can offer him no service worth mentioning.”
Li Su said, “There is one service you can do, and an extremely easy one to
perform; but you would not render that.”
Lu Bu pondered long in silence, then he said, “I might slay Ding Yuan and
bring over his soldiers to Dong Zhuo’s side. What think you of that?”
“If you would do that, there could be no greater service. But such a thing
must be done quickly.”
And Lu Bu promised his friend that he would do the deed and come over on the
morrow.
So Li Su took his leave. That very night, at the second watch, Lu Bu entered,
sword in hand, into his master’s tent. He found Ding Yuan reading by the
light of a solitary candle.
Seeing who came in, Ding Yuan said, “My son, what is afoot?”
“I am a bold hero,” said Lu Bu. “Do not think I am willing to be a son of
yours!”
“Why this change, Lu Bu?”
As a reply Lu Bu made one cut, and Ding Yuan’s head fell to the earth.
Then Lu Bu called the attendants and said, “He was an unjust man, and I have
slain him. Let those who back me stay. The others may depart.”
Most ran away. Next day, with the head of the murdered man as his gift, Lu Bu
betook himself to Li Su, who led him to Dong Zhuo. Dong Zhuo received him with
a warm welcome and had wine set before him.
“Your coming is welcome as the gentle dew to the parched grass,” said Dong
Zhuo.
Lu Bu made Dong Zhuo seat himself and then made an obeisance, saying, “Pray
let me bow to you as my adopted father!”
Dong Zhuo gave his newly won ally gold armor and silken robes and spread the
feast of welcome. They then separated.
Thence Dong Zhuo’s power and influence increased rapidly. He gave the
lordship of Hu (an ancient state) and the rank Commander of the Left Army to
his brother Dong Min. He appointed Lu Bu Lord of Luoyang, Commander of Capital
District, and Cavalry Commander. Dong Zhuo made himself Minister of Works,
Grand Commander, and Commander of the Front Army.
The adviser Li Ru never ceased from urging him to carry out the design of
deposing the young Emperor.
The now all-powerful Dong Zhuo prepared a banquet in the capital at which all
the officers of state were guests. He also bade Lu Bu post a company of armed
men right and left ready for action. The feast began and several courses were
served with nothing to distinguish that banquet from any other.
Then suddenly the host arose and drew his sword, saying, “He who is above us
being weak and irresolute is unfit for the duties of his high place. Wherefore
I, as of old did Yi Yin and Huo Guang, will set aside this Emperor giving him
the title of Prince of Hongnong, and I will place on the throne the present
Prince of Chenliu. And those who do not support me will suffer death.”
Fear seized them in its grip and they were silent, all but Yuan Shao who said,
“The Emperor was innocent of any fault, and to set him aside in favor of a
commoner was rebellion and nothing else!”
“The empire is in my hands!” cried Dong Zhuo. “When I choose to do this
thing, who will dare to say nay? Think you my sword lacks an edge?”
“If your sword is sharp, mine is never blunt!” said Yuan Shao as his sword
flashed out of the sheath.
The two men stood face to face amid the feasters.
When Ding Yuan by treacherous murder died,
The loss was great to Yuan Shao’s side.
The fate of Yuan Shao will be disclosed in later chapters.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 4 ****
Dong Zhuo was on the point of slaying Yuan Shao, but Li Ru checked him, saying,
“You must not kill rashly while the business hangs in the balance.”
Yuan Shao, his sword still unsheathed, left the assembly. He hung up the seals
of his office at the east gate and went to Jizhou Region.
Dong Zhuo said to Imperial Guardian Yuan Wei, “Your nephew behaved
improperly, but I pardon him for your sake. What think you of my scheme?”
“What you think is right,” was the reply.
“If anyone opposes the great scheme, he will be dealt with by military
law!” said Dong Zhuo.
The ministers, thoroughly dreaded, promised obedience, and the feast came to an
end.
Dong Zhuo asked Counselor Zhou Bi and Commander Wu Qiong what they thought of
the flight of Yuan Shao.
Zhou Bi said, “He left in a state of great anger. In such a state of
excitement much harm may ensue to the present state of affairs, especially as
the Yuan family have been noted for their high offices for four generations,
and their proteges and dependents are everywhere. If they assemble bold people
and call up their clients, all the valiant warriors will be in arms, and the
whole Shandong Mountains will be lost. You had better pardon Yuan Shao and give
him a post. He will be glad at being forgiven and will do no harm.”
Wu Qiong said, “Yuan Shao is fond of scheming, but he fails in decision and
so is not to be feared. But it would be well to give him rank and thus win
popular favor.”
Dong Zhuo followed this advice, and within that day sent a messenger to offer
Yuan Shao the governorship of Bohai.
On the first day of the ninth month, the Emperor was invited to proceed to the
Hall of Virtue where was a great assembly of officials.
There Dong Zhuo, sword in hand, faced the gathering and said, “The Emperor is
a weakling unequal to the burden of ruling this land. Now listen ye to the
document I have prepared!”
And Li Ru read as follows:
“The dutiful Emperor Ling too soon left his people. The emperor is the
cynosure of all the people of this land. Upon the present Emperor Bian, Heaven
has conferred but small gifts: In dignity and deportment he is deficient, and
in mourning he is remiss. Only the most complete virtue can grace imperial
dignity. Empress He has trained him improperly, and the whole state
administration has fallen into confusion. Empress Dong died suddenly and no one
knew why. The doctrine of the three bonds —-Heaven, Earth, and Human —-and
the continuity of Heaven and Earth interdependence have both been injured.
“But Liu Xian, Prince of Chenliu, is sage and virtuous beside being of
handsome exterior. He conforms to all the rules of propriety: His mourning is
sincere, and his speech is always correct. Eulogies of him fill the empire. He
is well fitted for the great duty of consolidating the rule of Han.
“Now therefore the Emperor is deposed and created Prince of Hongnong, and
Empress He retires from the administration.
“I pray the Prince of Chenliu to accept the throne in conformity with the
decrees of Heaven and Earth, the desires of people, and the fulfillment of the
hopes of humankind.”
This having been read, Dong Zhuo bade the officials lead the Emperor down from
the throne, remove his seal, and cause him to kneel facing the north, styling
himself faithful servant of the Throne and requesting commands. Moreover Dong
Zhuo bade Empress He strip off her royal dress of ceremony and await the
imperial command. Both victims of this oppression wept bitterly, and every
minister present was deeply affected.
One minister put his discontent into words, crying, “The false Dong Zhuo is
the author of this insult, which I will risk my life to wipe away!”
And with this he rushed at Dong Zhuo threatening with his ivory baton of
office.
It was Chair of the Secretariat Ding Guan. Dong Zhuo had Ding Guan removed and
summarily put to death. Before his death, Ding Guan ceased not to rail at the
oppressor, nor was he frightened at death.
The rebel Dong Zhuo conceived the foul design
To thrust the King aside and wrong his line.
With folded arms the courtiers stood, save one
Ding Guan, who dared to cry that wrong was done.
Then the emperor designate, Prince of Chenliu, went to the upper part of the
hall to receive congratulations. After this the former Emperor —-now Prince
of Hongnong —-, his mother, and the Imperial Consort, Lady Tang, were removed
to the Palace of Forever Calm. The entrance gates were locked against all
comers.
It was pitiful! There was the young emperor, after reigning less than half a
year, deposed and another put in his place. The new Emperor was Liu Xian, the
second son of the late Emperor Ling. He was nine years of age, five years
younger than his deposed brother. The new reign-style was changed to
Inauguration of Tranquillity, the first year (AD 190).
Becoming the Prime Minister, Dong Zhuo was most powerful and arrogant. When he
bowed before the throne, he did not declare his name. In going to court he did
not hasten. Booted and armed he entered the reception halls. He amassed a
wealth exceeding any other’s .
His adviser, Li Ru, impressed upon Dong Zhuo constantly to employ people of
reputation so that he should gain public esteem. Therefore, Dong Zhuo restored
many offices of those who had been victims of the eunuchs. For those who had
died, he gave ranks and positions to their progeny. When they told him Cai Yong
was a man of talent, Dong Zhuo summoned him. But Cai Yong would not go. Dong
Zhuo sent a message to him that if he did not come, he and his whole clan
should be exterminated. Then Cai Yong gave in and appeared. Dong Zhuo was very
gracious to him and promoted him thrice in a month. Cai Yong became Court
Counselor. Such was the generosity of the Prime Minister.
Meanwhile the deposed ruler, his mother, and his consort were immured in the
Palace of Forever Calm and found their daily supplies gradually diminishing.
The deposed Emperor wept incessantly. One day a pair of swallows gliding to and
fro moved him to verse:
“Spring and the green of the tender grass,
Flushes with joy as the swallows pass;
The wayfarers pause by the rippling stream,
And their eyes will new born gladness gleam;
With lingering gaze the roofs I see
Of the Palace that one time sheltered me.
But those whom I sheltered in all righteousness,
Let’s not stay in silence when the days pass useless?”
The messenger, sent by Dong Zhuo from time to time to the palace for news of
the prisoners, got hold of this poem and showed it to his master.
“So he shows his resentment by writing poems, eh! A fair excuse to put them
all out of the way,” said Dong Zhuo.
Li Ru was sent with ten men into the palace to consummate the deed. The three
were in one of the upper rooms when Li Ru arrived. The Emperor shuddered when
the maid announced the visitor’s name.
Presently Li Ru entered and offered a cup of poisoned wine to the Emperor. The
Emperor asked what this meant.
“Spring is the season of blending and harmonious interchange, and the Prime
Minister sends a wine cup of longevity,” said Li Ru.
“If it be the wine of longevity, you may share it too,” said Empress He.
Then Li Ru became brutally frank.
“You will not drink?” asked he.
He called the men with daggers and cords and bade the Emperor look at them.
“The cup, or these?” said he.
Then said Lady Tang, “Let the handmaid drink in place of her lord. Spare the
mother and her son, I pray!”
“And who may you be to die for a prince?” said Li Ru.
Then he presented the cup to the Empress once more and bade her drink.
She railed against her brother, the feckless He Jin, the author of all this
trouble. She would not drink.
Next Li Ru approached the Emperor.
“Let me say farewell to my mother,” begged he, and he did so in these
lines:
“The heaven and earth are changed,
Alas! the sun and the moon leave their courses,
I, once the center of all eyes, am driven to the farthest confines,
Oppressed by an arrogant minister my life nears its end,
Everything fails me and vain are my falling tears.”
Lady Tang sang:
“Heaven is to be rent asunder, Earth to fall away,
I, handmaid of an emperor, would grieve if I followed him not.
We have come to the parting of ways, the quick and the dead walk not together;
Alas! I am left alone with the grief in my heart.”
When they had sung these lines, they fell weeping into each others’ arms.
“The Prime Minister is awaiting my report,” said Li Ru, “and you delay
too long. Think you that there is any hope of succor?”
The Empress broke into another fit of railing, “The rebel forces us to death,
mother and son, and Heaven has abandoned us. But you, the tool of his crime,
will assuredly perish!”
Thereupon Li Ru grew more angry, laid hands on the Empress and threw her out of
the window. Then he bade the soldiers strangle Lady Tang and forced the lad to
swallow the wine of death.
Li Ru reported the achievement to his master who bade them bury the victims
without the city. After this Dong Zhuo’s behavior was more atrocious than
before. He spent his nights in the Palace, defiled the imperial concubines
there, and even slept on the Dragon Couch.
Once he led his soldiers out of the city to Yangcheng when the villagers, men
and women, were assembled from all sides for the annual spring festival. His
troops surrounded the place and plundered it. They took away booty by the cart
loads, and women prisoners and more than one thousand severed heads. The
procession returned to Capital Luoyang and published a story that they had
obtained a great victory over some rebels. They burned the heads beneath the
walls, and the women and jewelry were shared out among the soldiers.
A general named Wu Fu was disgusted at this ferocity and sought a chance to
slay Dong Zhuo. Wu Fu constantly wore a breastplate underneath his court dress
and carried in conceal a sharp dagger. One day when Dong Zhuo came to court, Wu
Fu met him on the steps and tried to stab him. But Dong Zhuo was a very
powerful man and held Wu Fu off till Lu Bu came to his help. Lu Bu struck down
the assailant.
“Who told you to rebel?” said Dong Zhuo.
Wu Fu glared at him and cried, “You are not my prince, I am not your
minister: Where is the rebellion? Your crimes fill the heavens, and every
person would slay you. I am sorry I cannot tear you asunder with chariots to
appease the wrath of the world!”
Dong Zhuo bade the guards take him out and hack him to pieces. Wu Fu only
ceased railing as he ceased to live.
That loyal servant of the latter days of Han.
His valor was high as the heavens, in all ages unequaled;
In the court itself would he slay the rebel, great is his fame!
Throughout all time will people call him a hero.
Thereafter Dong Zhuo always went well guarded.
At Bohai, Yuan Shao heard of Dong Zhuo’s misuse of power and sent a secret
letter to Minister of the Interior Wang Yun:
“That rebel Dong Zhuo outrages Heaven and has deposed his ruler. Common
people dare not speak of him: That is understandable. Yet you suffer his
aggressions as if you knew naught of them. How then are you a dutiful and loyal
minister? I have assembled an army and desire to sweep clean the royal
habitation, but I dare not lightly begin the task. If you are willing, then
find an opportunity to plot against this man. If you would use force, I am at
your command.”
The letter arrived but Wang Yun could see no chance to plot against Dong Zhuo.
One day while among the throng in attendance, mostly people of long service,
Wang Yun said to his colleagues, “This is my birthday, I pray you come to a
little party in my humble cot this evening.”
“We certainly will,” they cried, “and wish you long life.”
That night the tables were spread in an inner room, and his friends gathered
there. When the wine had made a few rounds, the host suddenly covered his face
and began to weep.
The guests were aghast.
“Sir, on your birthday too, why do you weep?” said they.
“It is not my birthday,” replied Wang Yun. “But I wished to call you
together, and I feared lest Dong Zhuo should suspect, so I made that the
excuse. This man insults the Emperor and does as he wishes so that the imperial
prerogatives are in imminent peril. I think of the days when our illustrious
founder destroyed the Qin, annihilated Chu, and obtained the empire. Who could
have foreseen this day when that Dong Zhuo has subjugated all to his will? That
is why I weep.”
Then they all wept with him.
Seated among the guests, however, was Cao Cao, who did not join in the weeping
but clapped his hands and laughed aloud.
“If all the officers of the government weep till dawn, and from dawn weep
till dark, will that slay Dong Zhuo?” said Cao Cao.
Wang Yun turned on him angrily.
“Your forbears ate the bounty of the Hans. Do you feel no gratitude? You can
laugh?”
“I laughed at the absurdity of an assembly like this being unable to compass
the death of one man. Foolish and incapable as I am, I will cut off his head
and hang it at the gate as an offering to the people.”
Wang Yun left his seat and went over to Cao Cao.
“These later days,” Cao Cao continued, “I have bowed my head to Dong Zhuo
with the sole desire of finding a chance to destroy him. Now he begins to trust
me, and so I can approach him sometimes. You have a sword with seven precious
jewels which I would borrow, and I will go into his palace and kill him. I care
not if I die for it.”
“What good fortune for the world that this is so!” said Wang Yun.
With this Wang Yun himself poured out a goblet for Cao Cao who drained it and
swore an oath. After this the treasured sword was brought out and given to Cao
Cao who hid it under his dress. He finished his wine, took leave of the guests,
and left the hall. Before long the others dispersed.
The next day Cao Cao, with this short sword girded on, came to the palace of
the Prime Minister.
“Where is the Prime Minister?” asked he.
“In the small guest room,” replied the attendants.
So Cao Cao went in and found his host seated on a couch. Lu Bu was at his side.
“Why so late, Cao Cao?” said Dong Zhuo.
“My horse is out of condition and slow,” replied Cao Cao.
Dong Zhuo turned to his henchman Lu Bu.
“Some good horses have come in from the west. You go and pick out a good one
as a present for him.”
And Lu Bu left.
“This traitor is doomed!” thought Cao Cao. He ought to have struck then,
but Cao Cao knew Dong Zhuo was very powerful, and he was afraid to act. He
wanted to make sure of his blow.
Now Dong Zhuo’s corpulence was such that he could not remain long sitting, so
he rolled over couch and lay face inwards.
“Now is the time,” thought the assassin, and he gripped the good sword
firmly.
But just as Cao Cao was going to strike, Dong Zhuo happened to look up and in a
mirror he saw the reflection of Cao Cao behind him with a sword in the hand.
“What are you doing, Cao Cao?” said Dong Zhuo turning suddenly. And at that
moment Lu Bu came along leading a horse.
Cao Cao in a flurry dropped on his knees and said, “I have a precious sword
here which I wish to present to Your Benevolence.”
Dong Zhuo took it. It was a fine blade, over a foot in length, inlaid with the
seven precious signs and very keen —-a fine sword in very truth. Dong Zhuo
handed the weapon to Lu Bu while Cao Cao took off the sheath which he also gave
to Lu Bu.
Then they went out to look at the horse. Cao Cao was profuse in his thanks and
said he would like to try the horse. So Dong Zhuo bade the guards bring saddle
and bridle. Cao Cao led the creature outside, leapt into the saddle, laid on
his whip vigorously, and galloped away eastward.
Lu Bu said, “Just as I was coming up, it seemed to me as if that fellow was
going to stab you, only a sudden panic seized him and he presented the weapon
instead.”
“I suspected him too!” said Dong Zhuo.
Just then Li Ru came in and they told him.
“Cao Cao has no family here in the capital but lodges quite alone and not far
away,” said Li Ru. “Send for him. If he comes forthwith, the sword was
meant as a gift. But if he makes any excuses, he had bad intentions. And you
can arrest him.”
They sent four prison warders to call Cao Cao.
They were absent a long time and then came back, saying, “Cao Cao had not
returned to his lodging but rode in hot haste out of the eastern gate. To the
gate commander’s questions he replied that he was on a special message for
the Prime Minister. He went off at full speed.”
“His conscience pricked him and so he fled. There is no doubt that he meant
assassination!” said Li Ru.
“And I trusted him so well!” said Dong Zhuo in a rage.
“There must be a conspiracy afoot. When we catch him, we shall know all about
it,” said Li Ru.
Letters and pictures of the fugitive Cao Cao were sent everywhere with orders
to catch him. A large reward in money was offered and a patent of nobility,
while those who sheltered him would be held to share his guilt.
Cao Cao traveled in hot haste toward Qiao, his home county. On the road at
Zhongmou, he was recognized by the guards at the gate and made prisoner. They
took him to the Magistrate. Cao Cao declared he was a merchant, named Huang Fu.
The Magistrate scanned his face most closely and remained in deep thought.
Presently the Magistrate said, “When I was at the capital seeking a post, I
knew you as Cao Cao. Why do you try to conceal your identity?”
The Magistrate ordered Cao Cao to the prison till the morrow when he could send
Cao Cao to the capital and claim the reward. He gave the soldiers wine and food
as a reward.
About midnight the Magistrate sent a trusty servant to bring the prisoner into
his private rooms for interrogation.
“They say the Prime Minister treated you well. Why did you try to harm
him?” said Magistrate.
“How can swallows and sparrows understand the flight of the crane and the
wild goose? I am your prisoner and to be sent to the capital for a reward. Why
so many questions?”
The Magistrate sent away the attendants and turning to the prisoner said, “Do
not despise me. I am no mere hireling; only I have not yet found the lord to
serve.”
Said Cao Cao, “My ancestors enjoyed the bounty of Han, and should I differ
from a bird or a beast if I did not desire to repay them with gratitude? I have
bowed the knee to Dong Zhuo that thereby I might find an opportunity against
him, and so remove this evil from the state. I have failed for this time. Such
is the will of Heaven.”
“And where are you going?”
“Home to my county. Thence I shall issue a summons calling all the bold
people to come with forces to kill the tyrant. This is my desire.”
Thereupon the Magistrate himself loosened the bonds of the prisoner, led him to
the upper seat, and bowed, saying, “I am called Chen Gong. My aged mother and
family are in the east county of Dongjun. I am deeply affected by your loyalty
and uprightness, and I will abandon my office and follow you!”
Cao Cao was delighted with this turn of affairs. Chen Gong at once collected
some money for the expenses of their journey and gave Cao Cao a different
dress. Then each took a sword and rode away toward Qiao.
Three days later at eventide they reached Chenggao. Cao Cao pointed with his
whip to a hamlet deep in the woods and said, “There lives my uncle, Lu Boshe,
a sworn-brother of my father. Suppose we go and ask news of my family and seek
shelter for the night?”
“Excellent!” said his companion Chen Gong, and they rode over, dismounted
at the farm gate and entered.
Lu Boshe greeted them and said to Cao Cao, “I hear the government has sent
stringent orders on all sides to arrest you. Your father has gone into hiding
to Chenliu. How has this all come about?”
Cao Cao told him and said, “Had it not been for this man here with me, I
should have been already hacked to pieces.”
Lu Boshe bowed low to Chen Gong, saying, “You are the salvation of the Cao
family. But be at ease and rest, I will find you a bed in my humble cottage.”
Lu Boshe then rose and went into the inner chamber where he stayed a long time.
When he came out, he said, “There is no good wine in the house. I am going
over to the village to get some for you.”
And he hastily mounted his donkey and rode away. The two travelers sat a long
time. Suddenly they heard at the back of the house the sound of sharpening a
knife.
Cao Cao said to Chen Gong, “He is not my real uncle. I am beginning to doubt
the meaning of his going off. Let us listen.”
So they silently stepped out into a straw hut at the back.
Presently someone said, “Bind before killing, eh?”
“As I thought,” said Cao Cao. “Now unless we strike first, we shall be
taken!”
Suddenly Cao Cao and Chen Gong dashed in, sword in hand, and slew the whole
household male and female, in all eight persons.
After this they searched the house. In the kitchen they found a pig bound ready
to kill.
“You were too suspicious,” said Chen Gong, “and we have slain honest
folks!”
Cao Cao and Chen Gong at once mounted and rode away. Soon they met their host
Lu Boshe coming home, and over the saddle in front of him they saw two vessels
of wine. In his hands he carried fruits and vegetables.
“Why are you going, Sirs?” Lu Boshe called to them.
“Wanted people dare not linger,” said Cao Cao.
“But I have bidden them kill a pig! Why do you refuse my poor hospitality? I
pray you ride back with me.”
Cao Cao paid no heed, urging his horse forward. But he suddenly drew his sword
and rode back after Lu Boshe.
“Who is that coming along?” called Cao Cao.
Lu Boshe turned and looked back, and Cao Cao at the same instant cut Lu Boshe
down.
Chen Gong was frightened.
“We were wrong enough before,” cried Chen Gong. “What now is this?”
“When he got home and saw his family killed, think you he would bear it
patiently? If he had raised an alarm and followed us, we should have been
killed.”
“To kill deliberately is very wrong,” said Chen Gong.
“Rather we let down the world than the world let us down!” was the reply.
Chen Gong only thought. They rode on some distance by moonlight and presently
knocked up an inn for shelter. Having first fed their horses, Cao Cao was soon
asleep, but Chen Gong lay thinking.
“I took him for a true man and left all to follow him, but he is as cruel as
a wolf. If I spare him, he will do more harm later,” thought Chen Gong.
And Chen Gong rose intending to kill his companion.
In his heart lie cruelty and venom, he is no true man;
In nought does he differ from his enemy Dong Zhuo.
The further fortunes of Cao Cao will be told in later chapters.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 5 ****
Gong reflected, “I joined him to do righteous things. Now if I killed him, I
would only do unrighteousness, and the people would condemn me. I rather leave
in silence.”
Rising from his bed before the sunrise, Chen Gong mounted his horse and rode
away eastward to his home county of Dongjun.
Cao Cao awoke with the day and missed his companion. Thought he, “Chen Gong
thinks me brutal because of a couple of egoistic phrases I used, and so he has
gone. I ought to push on too and not linger here.”
So Cao Cao traveled as quickly as possible toward Qiao. When he saw his father,
he related what had happened and said he wanted to dispose of all the family
property and enlist soldiers with the money.
“Our possessions are but small,” said his father, “and not enough to do
anything with. However, there is a graduate here, one Wei Hong, careless of
wealth but careful of virtue, whose family is very rich. With his help we might
hope for success.”
A feast was prepared, and Wei Hong was invited.
Cao Cao made him a speech: “The Hans have lost their lordship, and Dong Zhuo
is really a tyrant. He flouts his prince and is cruel to the people, who gnash
their teeth with rage. I would restore the Hans, but my means are insufficient.
Sir, I appeal to your loyalty and public spirit.”
Wei Hong replied, “I have long desired this but, so far, have not found a
person fit to undertake the task. Since you, Cao Cao, have so noble a desire, I
willingly devote all my property to the cause.”
This was joyful news, and the call to arms was forthwith prepared and sent far
and near. So they established a corps of volunteers and set up a large white
recruiting banner with the words Loyalty and Honor inscribed thereon. The
response was rapid, and volunteers came in like rain drops in number.
One day came a certain Yue Jing from Yangping and another Li Dian from Julu.
These two were appointed to Cao Cao’s personal staff. Another was one Xiahou
Dun from Qiao. He was descended from Xiahou Ying of old. Xiahou Dun had been
trained from his early boyhood to use the spear and the club. When only
fourteen he had been attached to a certain master-in-arms. One day one person
spoke disrespectfully of his master, and Xiahou Dun killed that person. For
this deed, however, he had to flee and had been an exile for some time. Now he
came to offer his services, accompanied by his cousin Xiahou Yuan. Each brought
a thousand trained soldiers. Really these two were brothers of Cao Cao by
birth, since Cao Cao’s father was originally of the Xiahou family, and had
only been adopted into the Cao family.
A few days later came Cao Cao’s two cousins, Cao Ren and Cao Hong, each with
one thousand followers. These two were accomplished horsemen and trained in the
use of arms.
Then drill began, and Wei Hong spent his treasure freely in buying clothing,
armor, flags, and banners. From all sides poured in gifts of grain.
When Yuan Shao received Cao Cao’s call to arms, he collected all those under
his command to the number of thirty thousand. Then he marched from Bohai to
Qiao to take the oath to Cao Cao. Next a manifesto was issued:
“Cao Cao and his associates, moved by a sense of duty, now make this
proclamation. Dong Zhuo defies Heaven and Earth. He is destroying the state and
injuring his prince. He pollutes the Palace and oppresses the people. He is
vicious and cruel. His crimes are heaped up. Now we have received a secret
command to call up soldiers, and we are pledged to cleanse the empire and
destroy the evil-doers. We will raise a volunteer army and exert all our
efforts to maintain the dynasty and succor the people. Respond to this, O
Nobles, by mustering your soldiers.”
Many from every side answered the summons as the following list shows:
1. Governor of Nanyang —-Yuan Shu
2. Imperial Protector of Jizhou Region —-Han Fu
3. Imperial Protector of Yuzhou Region —-Kong Zhou
4. Imperial Protector of Yanzhou Region —-Liu Dai
5. Governor of Henei —-Wang Kuang
6. Governor of Chenliu —-Zhang Miao
7. Governor of Dongjun —-Qiao Mao
8. Governor of Shanyang —-Yuan Yi
9. Lord of Jibei —-Bao Xin
10. Governor of Beihai —-Kong Rong
11. Governor of Guangling —-Zhang Chao
12. Imperial Protector of Xuzhou Region —-Tao Qian
13. Governor of Xiliang —-Ma Teng
14. Governor of Beiping —-Gongsun Zan
15. Governor of Shangdang —-Zhang Yang
16. Governor of Changsha —-Sun Jian
17. Governor of Bohai —-Yuan Shao
These contingents varied in size, from ten thousand to thirty thousand, but
each was complete in itself with its officers, civil and military, and battle-
leaders. They were heading for Capital Luoyang.
The Governor of Beiping, Gongsun Zan, while on his way with his force of
fifteen thousand, passed through the county of Pingyuan. There he saw among the
mulberry trees a yellow flag under which marched a small company. When they
drew nearer, he saw the leader was Liu Bei.
“Good brother, what do you here?” asked Gongsun Zan.
“You were kind to me once, and on your recommendation I was made the
magistrate of this county. I heard you were passing through and came to salute
you. May I pray you, my elder brother, enter into the city and rest your
steed?”
“Who are these two?” said Gongsun Zan, pointing to Liu Bei’s brothers.
“These are Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, my sworn brothers.”
“Were they fighting with you against the Yellow Scarves?” asked Gongsun
Zan.
“All my success was due to their efforts,” said Liu Bei.
“And what offices do they fill?”
“Guan Yu is a mounted archer; Zhang Fei is a foot archer.”
“Thus are able people buried!” said Gongsun Zan, sighing. Then he
continued. “All the highest in the land are now going to destroy the
rebellious Dong Zhuo. My brother, you would do better to abandon this petty
place and join us in restoring the House of Han. Why not?”
“I should like to go,” said Liu Bei.
“If you had let me kill him that other time, you would not have this trouble
today,” said Zhang Fei to Liu Bei and Guan Yu.
“Since things are so, let us pack and go,” said Guan Yu.
So without more ado, the three brothers, with a few horsemen, joined Gongsun
Zan and marched with him to join the great army.
One after another the feudal lords came up and encamped. Their camps extended
over seventy miles and more. When all had arrived, Cao Cao, as the head,
prepared sacrificial bullocks and horses and called all the lords to a great
assembly to decide upon their plan of attack.
Then spoke the Governor of Henei, Wang Kuang, “We have been moved by a noble
sense of right to assemble here. Now must we first choose a chief and bind
ourselves to obedience.”
Then said Cao Cao, “For four generations the highest offices of state have
been filled by members of the Yuan family, and their clients and supporters are
everywhere. As a descendant of ancient ministers of Han, Yuan Shao is a
suitable man to be our chief lord.”
Yuan Shao again and again declined this honor. But they all said, “It must be
he! There is no other!”
And then he agreed.
So the next day a three-story altar was built, and they planted about it the
banners of all parties in five directions of space. And they set up white
yaks’ tails and golden axes and emblems of military authority and the seals
of leadership round about.
All being ready, the chief lord was invited to ascend the altar. Clad in
ceremonial robes and girded with a sword, Yuan Shao reverently ascended. There
he burned incense, made obeisance and recited the oath:
“The House of Han has fallen upon evil days, the bands of imperial authority
are loosened. The rebel minister, Dong Zhuo, takes advantage of the discord to
work evil, and calamity falls upon honorable families. Cruelty overwhelms
simple folks. We, Yuan Shao and his confederates, fearing for the safety of the
imperial prerogatives, have assembled military forces to rescue the state. We
now pledge ourselves to exert our whole strength and act in concord to the
utmost limit of our powers. There must be no disconcerted or selfish action.
Should any depart from this pledge, may he lose his life and leave no
posterity. Almighty Heaven and Universal Earth and the enlightened spirits of
our forebears, be ye our witnesses!”
The reading finished, Yuan Shao smeared the blood of the sacrifice upon his
lips and upon the lips of those who shared the pledge. All were deeply affected
by the ceremony and many shed tears.
This done, the chief lord was supported down from the high place and led to his
tent, where he took the highest place and the others arranged themselves
according to rank and age. Here wine was served.
Presently Cao Cao said, “It behooves us all to obey the chief we have this
day set up, and support the state. There must be no feeling of rivalry or
superiority based upon numbers.”
Yuan Shao replied, “Unworthy as I am, yet as elected chief I must impartially
reward merit and punish offenses. Let each see to it that he obeys the national
laws and the army precepts. These must not be broken.”
“Only thy commands are to be obeyed!” cried all.
Then Yuan Shao said, “My brother, Yuan Shu, is appointed Chief of the
Commissariat. He must see to it that the whole camp is well supplied. But the
need of the moment is a van leader who shall go to River Si Pass and provoke a
battle. The other forces must take up strategic positions in support.”
Then the Governor of Changsha, Sun Jian, offered himself for this service.
“You are valiant and fierce, and equal to this service!” said Yuan Shao.
The force under Sun Jian set out and presently came to River Si Pass. The guard
there sent a swift rider to the capital to announce to the Prime Minister the
urgency of the situation.
Ever since Dong Zhuo had secured his position, he had given himself up to
luxury without stint. When the urgent news reached Adviser Li Ru, he at once
went to his master, who much alarmed called a great council.
Lu Bu stood forth and said, “Do not fear, my father. I look upon all the
lords beyond the Pass as so much stubble. And with the warriors of our fierce
army, I will put everyone of them to death and hang their heads at the gates of
the capital!”
“With your aid I can sleep secure!” said Dong Zhuo.
But someone behind Lu Bu broke in upon his speech, saying, “An ox-cleaver to
kill a chicken! There is no need for the General to go: I will cut off their
heads as easily as I would take a thing out of my pocket!”
Dong Zhuo looked up and his eyes rested on a stalwart man of fierce mien, lithe
and supple as a beast. He had round head like a leopard and shoulders like an
ape’s . His name was Hua Xiong of Guanxi. Dong Zhuo rejoiced at Hua Xiong’s
bold words and at once appointed him Commander of the Valiant Cavalry and gave
him fifty thousand of horse and foot. Hua Xiong and three other generals —-Li
Su, Hu Zhen, and Zhao Cen —-hastily moved toward River Si Pass.
Among the feudal lords, Bao Xin, the Lord of Jibei, was jealous lest the chosen
Van Leader Sun Jian should win too great honors. Wherefore Bao Xin endeavored
to meet the foe first, and so he secretly dispatched his brother, Bao Zhong,
with three thousand by a bye road. As soon as this small force reached the
Pass, they offered battle.
Fast reacting, Hua Xiong at the head of five hundred armored horsemen swept
down from the Pass, crying, “Flee not, rebel!”
But Bao Zhong was afraid and turned back. Hua Xiong came on, his arm rose, the
sword fell, and Bao Zhong was cut down from his horse. Most of Bao Zhong’s
company were captured. Bao Zhong’s head was sent to the Prime Minister’s
palace. Hua Xiong was promoted to Commander-in-Chief.
Sun Jian presently approached the Pass. He had four generals: Cheng Pu of Tuyin
whose weapon was an iron-spined lance with snake-headed blade; Huang Gai of
Lingling who wielded an iron whip; Han Dang of Lingzhi using a heavy saber; and
Zu Mao of Wujun who fought with a pair of swords.
Commander Sun Jian wore a helmet of fine silver wrapped round with a purple
turban. He carried across his body his sword of ancient ingot iron and rode a
dappled horse with flowing mane.
Sun Jian advanced to the Pass and hailed the defenders, crying, “Helpers of a
villain! Be quick to surrender!”
Hua Xiong bade Hu Zhen lead five thousand out against Sun Jian. Cheng Pu with
the snaky lance rode out from Sun Jian’s side and engaged. After a very few
bouts, Cheng Pu killed Hu Zhen on the spot by a thrust through the throat. Then
Sun Jian gave the signal for the main army to advance. But from the Pass, Hua
Xiong’s troops rained down showers of stones, which proved too much for the
assailants, and they retired into camp at Liangdong. Sun Jian sent the report
of victory to Yuan Shao.
Sun Jian also sent an urgent message for supplies to the commissary.
But a counselor said to the Controller Yuan Shu, “This Sun Jian is a very
tiger in the east. Should he take the capital and destroy Dong Zhuo, we should
have a tiger in place of a wolf. Do not send him grain. Starve his troops, and
that will decide the fate of that army.”
And Yuan Shu gave ears to the detractor and sent no grain or forage. Soon Sun
Jian’s hungry soldiers showed their disaffection by indiscipline, and the
spies bore the news to the defenders of the Pass.
Li Su made a plot with Hua Xiong, saying, “We will launch tonight a speedy
attack against Sun Jian in front and rear so that we can capture him.”
Hua Xiong agreed and prepared for the attack. So the soldiers of the attacking
force were told off and given a full meal. At dark they left the Pass and crept
by secret paths to the rear of Sun Jian’s camp. The moon was bright and the
wind cool. They arrived about midnight and the drums beat an immediate attack.
Sun Jian hastily donned his fighting gear and rode out. He ran straight into
Hua Xiong and the two warriors engaged. But before they had exchanged many
passes, Li Su’s army came up from behind and set fire to whatever would burn.
Sun Jian’s army were thrown into confusion and fled in disorder. A melee
ensued, and soon only Zu Mao was left at Sun Jian’s side. These two broke
through the Pass and fled. Hua Xiong coming in hot pursuit, Sun Jian took his
bow and let fly two arrows in quick succession, but both missed. He fitted a
third arrow to the string, but drew the bow so fiercely that it snapped. He
cast the bow to the earth and set off at full gallop.
Then spoke Zu Mao, “My lord’s purple turban is a mark that the rebels will
too easily recognize. Give it to me, and I will wear it!”
So Sun Jian exchanged his silver helmet with the turban for his general’s
headpiece, and the two men parted, riding different ways. The pursuers looking
only for the purple turban went after its wearer, and Sun Jian escaped along a
by-road.
Zu Mao, hotly pursued, then tore off the headdress which he hung on the post of
a half-burned house as he passed and dashed into the thick woods. Hua Xiong’s
troops seeing the purple turban standing motionless dared not approach, but
they surrounded it on every side and shot at it with arrows. Presently they
discovered the trick, went up and seized it.
This was the moment that Zu Mao awaited. At once he rushed forth, his two
swords whirling about, and dashed at the leader. But Hua Xiong was too quick.
With a loud yell, Hua Xiong slashed at Zu Mao and cut him down the horse. Hua
Xiong and Li Su continued the slaughter till the day broke, and they led their
troops back to the Pass.
Cheng Pu, Huang Gai, and Han Dang in time found their chief and the soldiers
gathered. Sun Jian was much grieved at the loss of Zu Mao.
When news of the disaster reached Yuan Shao, he was greatly chagrined and
called all the lords to a council. They assembled and Gongsun Zan was the last
to arrive.
When all were seated in the tent Yuan Shao said, “The brother of General Bao
Xin, disobeying the rules we made for our guidance, rashly went to attack the
enemy: He was slain and with him many of our soldiers. Now Sun Jian has been
defeated. Thus our fighting spirit has suffered and what is to be done?”
Everyone was silent. Lifting his eyes, Yuan Shao looked round from one to
another till he came to Gongsun Zan, and then he remarked three men who stood
behind Gongsun Zan’s seat. They were of striking appearance as they stood
there, all three smiling cynically.
“Who are those men behind you?” said Yuan Shao.
Gongsun Zan told Liu Bei to come forward, and said, “This is Liu Bei,
Magistrate of Pingyuan and a brother of mine who shared my humble cottage when
we were students.”
“It must be the Liu Bei who broke up the Yellow Scarves rebellion,” said
Cao Cao.
“It is he,” said Gongsun Zan, and he ordered Liu Bei to make his obeisance
to the assembly, to whom Liu Bei then related his services and his origin, all
in full detail.
“Since he is of the Han line, he should be seated,” said Yuan Shao, and he
bade Liu Bei sit.
Liu Bei modestly thanked him, declining.
Said Yuan Shao, “This consideration is not for your fame and office. I
respect you as a scion of the imperial family.”
So Liu Bei took his seat in the lowest place of the long line of lords. And his
two brothers with folded arms took their stations behind him.
Even as they were at this meeting came in a scout to say that Hua Xiong with a
company of mail-clad horsemen was coming down from the Pass. They were
flaunting Sun Jian’s captured purple turban on the end of a bamboo pole. The
enemy was soon hurling insults at those within the stockade and challenging
them to fight.
“Who dares go out to give battle?” said Yuan Shao.
“I will go,” said Yu She, a renown general of Yuan Shu, stepping forward.
So Yu She went, and almost immediately one came back to say that Yu She had
fallen in the third bout of Hua Xiong.
Fear began to lay its cold hand on the assembly.
Then Imperial Protector Han Fu said, “I have a brave warrior among my army.
Pan Feng is his name, and he could slay this Hua Xiong.”
So Pan Feng was ordered out to meet the foe. With his great battle-ax in his
hand, Pan Feng mounted and rode forth. But soon came the direful tidings that
General Pan Feng too had fallen. The faces of the gathering paled at this.
“What a pity my two able generals, Yan Liang and Wen Chou, are not here! Then
should we have someone who would not fear this Hua Xiong,” said Yuan Shao.
He had not finished when from the lower end a voice tolled, “I will go, take
Hua Xiong’s head, and lay it before you here!”
All turned to look at the speaker. He was tall and had a long beard. His eyes
were those of a phoenix and his eyebrows thick and bushy like silkworms. His
face was a swarthy red and his voice deep as the sound of a great bell.
“Who is he?” asked Yuan Shao.
Gongsun Zan told them it was Guan Yu, brother of Liu Bei.
“And what is he?” asked Yuan Shao.
“He is in the train of Liu Bei as a mounted archer.”
“What! An insult to us all!” roared Yuan Shu from his place. “Have we no
leader? How dare an archer speak thus before us? Let us beat him forth!”
But Cao Cao intervened. “Peace, O Yuan Shu! Since this man speaks great
words, he is certainly valiant. Let him try. If he fails, then we may reproach
him.”
“Hua Xiong will laugh at us if we send a mere archer to fight him,” said
Yuan Shao.
“This man looks no common person. And how can the enemy know he is but a
bowman?” said Cao Cao.
“If I fail, then can you take my head,” spoke Guan Yu.
Cao Cao bade them heat some wine and offered a cup to Guan Yu as he went out.
“Pour it out,” said Guan Yu. “I shall return in a little space.”
Guan Yu went with his weapon in his hand and vaulted into the saddle. Those in
the tent heard the fierce roll of the drums and then a mighty sound as if skies
were falling and earth rising, hills trembling and mountains tearing asunder.
And they were sore afraid. And while they were listening with ears intent, lo!
the gentle tinkle of horse bells, and Guan Yu returned, throwing at their feet
the head of the slain leader, their enemy Hua Xiong.
The wine was still warm!
This doughty deed has been celebrated in verse:
The power of the man stands first in all the world,
At the gate of the camp was heard the rolling of the battle drums;
Then Guan Yu set aside the wine cup till he should have displayed his valor,
And the wine was still warm when Hua Xiong had been slain.
Cao Cao was greatly excited at this success.
But Zhang Fei’s voice was heard, shouting, “My brother has slain Hua Xiong.
What are we waiting for? Why not break through the Pass and seize Dong Zhuo?
Could there have been a better time?”
Again arose the angry voice of Yuan Shu, “We high officials are too meek and
yielding. Here is the petty follower of a small magistrate daring to flaunt his
prowess before us! Expel him from the tent, I say.”
But again Cao Cao interposed, “Shall we consider the station of him who has
done a great service?”
“If you hold a mere magistrate in such honor, then I simply withdraw,” said
Yuan Shu.
“Is a word enough to defeat a grand enterprise?” said Cao Cao.
Then he told Gongsun Zan to lead the three brothers back to their own camp, and
the other chiefs then dispersed. That night Cao Cao secretly sent presents of
meat and wine to soothe the three after this adventure.
When Hua Xiong’s troops straggled back and told the story of defeat and
death, Li Ru was greatly distressed. He wrote urgent letters to his master who
called in his trusted advisers to a council.
Li Ru summed up the situation, saying, “We have lost our best leader, and the
rebel power has thereby become very great. Yuan Shao is at the head of this
confederacy, and his uncle, Yuan Wei, is holder of the office of Imperial
Guardianship. If those in the capital combine with those in the country, we may
suffer. Therefore we must remove them. So I request you, Sir Prime Minister, to
place yourself at the head of your army and break this confederation.”
Dong Zhuo agreed and at once ordered his two generals, Li Jue and Guo Si, to
take five hundred troops and surround the residence of Imperial Guardian Yuan
Wei, slay every soul regardless of age, and hang the head of Yuan Wei outside
the gate as trophy. And Dong Zhuo commanded two hundred thousand troops to
advance in two armies. The first fifty thousand were under Li Jue and Guo Si,
and they were to hold River Si Pass. They should not necessarily fight. The
other one hundred fifty thousand under Dong Zhuo himself went to Tiger Trap
Pass. His counselors and commanders —-Li Ru, Lu Bu, Fan Chou, Zhang Ji, and
others —-marched with the main army.
Tiger Trap Pass is fifteen miles from Capital Luoyang. As soon as they arrived,
Dong Zhuo bade Lu Bu take thirty thousand soldiers and make a strong stockade
on the outside of the Pass. The main body with Dong Zhuo would occupy the Pass.
News of this movement reaching the confederate lords. Yuan Shao summoned a
council.
Said Cao Cao, “The occupation of the Pass would cut our armies in two;
therefore, we must oppose Dong Zhuo’s army on the way.”
So eight of the commanders —-Wang Kuang, Qiao Mao, Bao Xin, Yuan Yi, Kong
Rong, Zhang Yang, Tao Qian, and Gongsun Zan —-were ordered to go in the
direction of the Tiger Trap Pass to oppose their enemy. Cao Cao and his troops
moved among them as reserve to render help where needed.
Of the eight, Wang Kuang, the Governor of Henei, was the first to arrive, and
Lu Bu went to give battle with three thousand armored horsemen. When Wang Kuang
had ordered his army, horse and foot, in battle array, he took his station
under the great banner and looked over at his foe.
Lu Bu was a conspicuous figure in front of the line. On his head was a triple
curved headdress of ruddy gold with pheasant tails. He wore a warring velvet-
red robe of Xichuan silk embroidered with thousand flowers, which was
overlapped by golden mail adorned with a gaping animal’s head, joined by
rings at the sides and girt to his waist with a belt fastened by a beautiful
lion-head clasp. His bow and arrows were slung on his shoulders, and he carried
a long heavy trident halberd. He was seated on his snorting steed Red Hare.
Indeed Lu Bu was the man among humans, as Red Hare was the horse among horses.
“Who dares go out to fight him?” asked Wang Kuang turning to those behind
him.
In response a valiant general from Henei named Fang Yue spurred to the front,
his spear set ready for battle. Lu Bu and Fang Yue met: Before the fifth bout
Fang Yue fell under a thrust of the trident halberd, and Lu Bu dashed forward.
Wang Kuang’s troops could not stand and scattered in all directions. Lu Bu
went to and fro slaying all he met. He was irresistible.
Luckily, two other troops led by Qiao Mao and Yuan Yi came up and rescued the
wounded Wang Kuang, and Lu Bu pulled back. The three, having lost many troops,
withdrew ten miles and made a stockade. And before long the remaining five
commanders came up and joined them. They held a council and agreed Lu Bu was a
hero no one could match.
And while they sat there anxious and uncertain, it was announced that Lu Bu had
returned to challenge them. They mounted their horses and placed themselves at
the heads of eight forces, each body in its station on the high ground. Around
them was the opposing army in formation, commanded by Lu Bu, innumerable horse
and foot, with splendid embroidered banners waving in the breeze.
They attacked Lu Bu. Mu Shun, a general of Governor Zhang Yang, rode out with
his spear set, but soon fell at the first encounter with Lu Bu. This frightened
the others. Then galloped forth Wu Anguo, a general under Governor Kong Rong.
Wu Anguo raised his iron mace ready at his rival. Lu Bu whirling his halberd
and urging on his steed came to meet Wu Anguo. The two fought, well matched for
ten bouts, when a blow from the trident halberd broke Wu Anguo’s wrist.
Letting his mace fall to the ground he fled. Then all eight of the lords led
forth their armies to his rescue, and Lu Bu retired to his line.
The fighting then ceased, and after their return to camp another council met.
Cao Cao said, “No one can stand against the prowess of Lu Bu. Let us call up
all the lords and evolve some good plan. If only Lu Bu were taken, Dong Zhuo
could easily be killed.”
While the council was in progress again came Lu Bu to challenge them, and again
the commanders moved out against him. This time Gongsun Zan, flourishing his
spear, went to meet the enemy. After a very few bouts Gongsun Zan turned and
fled; Lu Bu following at the topmost speed of Red Hare. Red Hare was a three-
hundred-mile-a-day horse, swift as the wind. The lords watched Red Hare gained
rapidly upon the flying horseman, and Lu Bu’s halberd was poised ready to
strike Gongsun Zan just behind the heart. Just then dashed in a third rider
with round glaring eyes and a bristling mustache, and armed with a ten-foot
serpent halberd.
“Stay, O twice bastard!” roared he, “I, Zhang Fei of Yan, await you!”
Seeing this opponent, Lu Bu left the pursuit of Gongsun Zan and engaged the new
adversary. Zhang Fei was elated, and he rode forth with all his energies. They
two were worthily matched, and they exchanged half a hundred bouts with no
advantage to either side. Then Guan Yu, impatient, rode out with his huge and
weighty green-dragon saber and attacked Lu Bu on the other flank. The three
steeds formed a triangle and their riders battered away at each other for
thirty bouts, yet still Lu Bu stood firm.
Then Liu Bei rode out to his brothers’ aid, his double swords raised ready to
strike. The steed with the flowing mane was urged in at an angle, and now Lu Bu
had to contend with three surrounding warriors at whom he struck one after
another, and they at him, the flashing of the warriors’ weapons looking like
the revolving lamps suspended at the new year. And the warriors of the eight
armies gazed rapt with amazement at such a battle.
But Lu Bu’s guard began to weaken and fatigue seized him. Looking hard in the
face of Liu Bei, Lu Bu feigned a fierce thrust thus making Liu Bei suddenly
draw back. Then, lowering his halberd, Lu Bu dashed through the angle thus
opened and got away.
But was it likely they would allow him to escape? They whipped their steeds and
followed hard. The soldiers of the eight armies cracked their throats with
thunderous cheers and all dashed forward, pressing after Lu Bu as he made for
the shelter of the Tiger Trap Pass. And first among his pursuers were the three
brothers.
An ancient poet has told of this famous fight in these lines:
The fateful day of Han came in the reigns of Huan and Ling,
Their glory declined as the sun sinks at the close of day.
Dong Zhuo, infamous minister of state, pulled down the youthful Bian.
It is true the new Xian was a weakling, too timid for his times.
Then Cao Cao proclaimed abroad these wicked deeds,
And the great lords, moved with anger, assembled their forces.
In council met they and chose as their oath-chief Yuan Shao,
Pledged themselves to maintain the ruling house and tranquillity.
Of the warriors of that time matchless Lu Bu was the boldest.
His valor and prowess are sung by all within the four seas.
He clothed his body in silver armor like the scales of a dragon,
On his head was a golden headdress with pheasant tails,
About his waist a shaggy belt, the clasp, two wild beasts’ heads with
gripping jaws,
His flowing, embroidered robe fluttered about his form,
His swift courser bounded over the plain, a mighty wind following,
His terrible trident halberd flashed in the sunlight, bright as a placid lake.
Who dared face him as he rode forth to challenge?
The bowels of the confederate lords were torn with fear and their hearts
trembled.
Then leaped forth Zhang Fei, the valiant warrior of the north,
Gripped in his mighty hand the long serpent halberd,
His mustache bristled with anger, standing stiff like wire.
His round eyes glared, lightning flashes darted from them.
Neither quailed in the fight, but the issue was undecided.
Guan Yu stood out in front, his soul vexed within him,
His green-dragon saber shone white as frost in the sunlight,
His bright colored fighting robe fluttered like butterfly wings,
Demons and angels shrieked at the thunder of his horse hoofs,
In his eyes was fierce anger, a fire to be quenched only in blood.
Next Liu Bei joined the battle, gripping his twin sword blades,
The heavens themselves trembled at the majesty of his wrath.
These three closely beset Lu Bu and long drawn out was the battle,
Always he warded their blows, never faltering a moment.
The noise of their shouting rose to the sky, and the earth reechoed it,
The heat of battle ranged to the frozen pole star.
Worn out, feeling his strength fast ebbing, Lu Bu thought to flee,
He glanced at the hills around and thither would fly for shelter,
Then, reversing his halberd and lowering its lofty point,
Hastily he fled, loosing himself from the battle;
With head low bent, he gave the rein to his courser,
Turned his face away and fled to Tiger Trap Pass.
The three brothers maintained the pursuit to the Pass. Looking up they saw an
immense umbrella of black gauze fluttering in the west wind.
“Certainly there is Dong Zhuo,” cried Zhang Fei. “What is the use of
pursuing Lu Bu? Better far seize the chiefest rebel and so pluck up the evil by
the roots!”
And he whipped up his steed toward the Pass.
To quell rebellion seize the leader if you can;
If you need a wondrous service then first find a wondrous man.
The following chapters will unfold the result of the battle.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 6 ****
Zhang Fei rode hard up to the Pass, but the defenders sent down stones and
arrows like rain so that he could not enter, and he returned. The eight lords
all joined in felicitations to the three brothers for their services, and the
story of victory was sent to Yuan Shao, who ordered Sun Jian to make an
immediate advance.
Thereupon Sun Jian with two trusty generals, Cheng Pu and Huang Gai, went over
to the camp of Yuan Shu.
Tracing figures on the ground with his staff, Sun Jian said, “Dong Zhuo and I
had no personal quarrel. Yet now I have thrown myself into the battle
regardless of consequences, exposed my person to the risk of wounds and fought
bloody battles to their bitter end. And why? That I might be the means of
ridding my country of a rebel and —-for the private advantage of your family.
Yet you, heeding the slanderous tongue of certain counselor, formerly withheld
the supplies absolutely necessary to me, and so I suffered defeat. How can you
explain, General?”
Yuan Shu, confused and frightened, had no word to reply. He ordered the death
of the slanderer to placate Sun Jian.
Then suddenly they told Sun Jian, “Some officer has come riding down from the
Pass to see you, General. He is in the camp.”
Sun Jian therefore took his leave and returned to his own camp, where he found
the visitor was Li Jue, one of the much trusted commanders of Dong Zhuo.
“Wherefore come you?” said Sun Jian.
Li Jue replied, “You are the one person for whom my master has respect and
admiration, and he sends me to arrange a matrimonial alliance between the two
families. He wishes that his daughter may become the wife of your son.”
“What! Dong Zhuo, that rebel and renegade, that subverter of the Throne! I
wish I could destroy his nine generations as a thank-offering to the empire!
Think you I would be willing to have an alliance with such a family? I will not
slay you as I ought, but go, and go quickly! Yield the Pass and I may spare
your lives. If you delay, I will grind your bones to powder and make mincemeat
of your flesh!”
Li Jue threw his arms over his head and ran out. He returned to his master and
told him what a rude reception he had met with. Dong Zhuo asked his adviser Li
Ru how to reply to this.
Li Ru said, “Lu Bu’s late defeat had somewhat blunted the edge of our
army’s desire for battle. It would be well to return to the capital and
remove the Emperor to Changan, as the street children had been lately singing:
“A Han on the west, a Han on the east.
The deer (emperor) in Changan shall worry least.”
Li Ru continued, “If you think out this couplet, it applies to the present
juncture. Half the first line refers to the founder of the dynasty, Liu Bang
the Supreme Ancestor, who became ruler in the western city of Changan, which
was the capital during twelve reigns. The other half corresponds to Liu Xiu the
Latter Han Founder who ruled from Luoyang, the eastern capital during twelve
latter reigns. The revolution of the heavens brings us back to this starting
moment. Thus if you remove to Changan, there will be no need for anxiety.”
Dong Zhuo was exceedingly pleased and said, “Had you not spoken thus, I
should not have understood!”
Then taking Lu Bu with him, Dong Zhuo started at once for Capital Luoyang.
Here he called all the officials to a great council in the Palace and addressed
them, “After two centuries of rule here, the royal fortune has been
exhausted, and I perceive that the aura of rule has migrated to Changan,
whither I now desire to move the court. All you had better pack up for the
journey.”
Yang Biao, Minister of the Interior, said, “I pray you reflect. The Land
Within the Passes is all destruction. There is no reason to renounce the
ancestral temples and abandon the imperial tombs here. I fear the people will
be alarmed. It is easy to alarm them but difficult to pacify them.”
“Do you oppose the state plans?” said Dong Zhuo angrily.
Another official, Grand Commander Huang Wan, supported his colleague, “In the
era of Recommencement (AD 23-25), Fan Chong of the Red Eyebrows rebels burned
Changan to the ground and reduced the place to broken tiles. The inhabitants
scattered all but a few. It is wrong to abandon these palaces here for a
wasteland.”
Dong Zhuo replied, “The East of the Passes is full of sedition, and all the
empire is in rebellion. The city of Changan is protected by the Yaohan
Mountains and the Hangu Pass. Moreover, it is near Longyou, whence can be
easily brought timber, stone, brick, and building materials. In a month or so
palaces can be erected. So an end to your wild words!”
Yet Minister of Works Xun Shuang raised another protest against disturbing the
people, but Dong Zhuo overbore him also.
“How can I stop to consider a few common people when my scheme affects the
empire?” said Dong Zhuo.
That day the three objectors —-Yang Biao, Huang Wan, and Xun Shuang —-were
removed from their offices and reduced to the rank of commoners.
As Dong Zhuo went out to get into his coach, he met two other officers who made
obeisance. They were the Chair of the Secretariat, Zhou Bi, and the Commander
of the City Gates, Wu Qiong. Dong Zhuo stopped and asked them what they wanted.
Said Zhou Bi, “We venture to try to dissuade you from moving the capital to
Changan.”
Dong Zhuo replied, “You two persuaded me to give Yuan Shao office. Now he has
already turned traitor, and you are of the same party!”
And without more ado he bade his guards take both outside the city and put them
to death. The command to remove to the new capital immediately was issued.
Speaking to Dong Zhuo, Li Ru pointed out, “We are short of money and food,
and the rich people of Luoyang could be easily plundered. This is a good
occasion to link them to the rebels and to confiscate their properties.”
Dong Zhuo sent five thousand troops out to plunder and slay. They captured many
thousand wealthy householders and, having stuck flags on their heads saying
they were Traitors and Rebels, drove them out of the city and put them to
death. Their properties were all seized.
The task of driving forth the inhabitants, some millions, was given to two of
Dong Zhuo’s commanders, Li Jue and Guo Si. The people were sent off in bands,
each band between two parties of soldiers, who drove them torward Changan.
Enormous numbers fell by the road side and died in the ditches, and the escort
plundered the fugitives and defiled the women. A wail of sorrow arose to the
very sky.
Dong Zhuo’s final orders as he left Capital Luoyang were to burn the whole
city: Houses, palaces, temples, and everything were devoured by the flames. The
capital became but a patch of scorched earth.
Dong Zhuo sent Lu Bu to desecrate the tombs of the emperors and their consorts
for the jewels therein, and the common soldiers took the occasion to dig up the
graves of officials and plunder the cemeteries of the wealthy. The spoil of the
city, gold and silver, pearls and silks, and beautiful ornaments, filled
several thousand carts. With these and the persons of the Emperor and his
household, Dong Zhuo moved off to the new capital in the first year of
Inauguration of Tranquillity (AD 190).
Luoyang being thus abandoned, the general of Dong Zhuo at River Si Pass, Zhao
Cen, evacuated that post of vantage, which Sun Jian at once occupied. Liu Bei
and his brothers took Tiger Trap Pass and the confederate lords advanced.
Sun Jian hastened to the late capital which was still in flames. When he
arrived, dense smoke hung all over it and spread for miles around. No living
thing, not a fowl, or a dog, or a human being, remained. Sun Jian told off his
soldiers to extinguish the fires and set out camping places for the confederate
lords.
Cao Cao went to see Yuan Shao and said, “Dong Zhuo has gone west. We ought to
follow and attack his rear without loss of time. Why do you remain inactive?”
“All our colleagues are worn out, and there is nothing to be gained by
attack,” said Yuan Shao.
Cao Cao said, “This moment was most propitious in the utter confusion that
reigned —-palaces burned, the Emperor abducted, the whole world upset, and no
one knowing whither to turn. The villain will soon be ended, and a single blow
could exterminate Dong Zhuo. Why not pursue?”
But all the confederate lords seemed of one mind, and that mind was to postpone
action. So they did nothing.
“Those unworthy people cannot discuss worthy thing!” cried Cao Cao.
Then, he and his six generals —-Xiahou Dun, Xiahou Yuan, Cao Ren, Cao Hong,
Li Dian, and Yue Jing —-and ten thousand troops started in pursuit.
The road to the new capital led through Yingyang. When Dong Zhuo reached it,
Governor Xu Rong went to welcome the cavalcade.
Li Ru said, “As there is some danger of pursuit, it would be well to order
the Governor of this place to lay an ambush outside the city. He is to let the
pursuers pass and be ready to cut off their retreat, when our army beats them
off. That will teach any others not to follow.”
Then Dong Zhuo ordered Lu Bu to command the rear guard. Very soon they saw Cao
Cao coming up, and Lu Bu laughed at his colleague’s foresight. He set out his
troops in fighting order.
Cao Cao rode forward, crying, “Rebels, abductors, drovers of the people,
where are you going?”
Lu Bu replied, “Treacherous simpleton, what mad words are these?”
Then from Cao Cao army rode forth Xiahou Dun with his spear set, and Lu Bu and
Xiahou Dun engaged. The combat had hardly begun when Li Ru with a cohort came
in from the left. Cao Cao bade Xiahou Yuan meet this onslaught. However, on the
other side appeared Guo Si and his company. Cao Cao sent Cao Ren against Guo
Si. The onrush on three sides was too much to withstand, and Lu Bu’s army was
overwhelming, so Xiahou Dun had to retire to the main line. Thereupon Lu Bu’s
armored troops attacked and completed the defeat. The beaten army of Cao Cao
turned toward Yingyang.
They got as far as the foot of a hill in the evening about the second watch,
and the moon made it as light as day. Here they halted to reform. Just as they
were burying the boilers to prepare a meal, there arose a great noise of
shouting on all sides and out came the troops of Governor Xu Rong from the
ambush fresh to attack.
Cao Cao, thrown into a flurry, mounted and fled. He ran right in the way of the
waiting Xu Rong. Then he dashed off in another direction, but Xu Rong shot an
arrow after him which struck him in the shoulder. The arrow still in the wound,
Cao Cao fled for his life. As he went over the hill, two soldiers lying in wait
among the grass suddenly dashed out and wounded his horse, which fell and
rolled over. And as he slipped from the saddle, he was seized and made
prisoner.
Just then a horseman came, riding at full speed and whirling his sword up, cut
down both the captors, and rescued Cao Cao. It was Cao Hong.
Cao Cao said, “I am doomed, good brother. Go and save yourself!”
“My lord, mount my horse quickly! I will go afoot,” said Cao Hong.
“If those wretches come up, what then?” said Cao Cao.
“The world can do without Cao Hong, but not without you, my lord!”
“If I live, I shall owe you my life,” said Cao Cao.
So he mounted. Cao Hong tore off his own breastplate, gripped his sword, and
went on foot after the horse. Thus they proceeded till the fourth watch when
they saw before them a broad stream, and behind they still heard the shouts of
pursuers drawing nearer and nearer.
“This is my fate,” said Cao Cao. “I am really doomed!”
Cao Hong helped Cao Cao down from his horse. Then taking off his fighting robe
and helmet, Cao Hong took the wounded man on his back and waded into the
stream. When they reached the further side, the pursuers had already gained the
bank whence they shot arrows.
Cao Cao all wet pushed on. Dawn was near. They went on another ten miles and
then sat down to rest under a precipice. Suddenly loud shouting was heard and a
party of horse appeared. It was Governor Xu Rong who had forded the river
higher up. Just at this moment Xiahou Dun and Xiahou Yuan, with several dozens
men, came along.
“Hurt not my lord!” cried Xiahou Dun to Xu Rong, who at once rushed at him.
But the combat was short. Xu Rong speedily fell under a spear thrust of Xiahou
Dun, and his troops were driven off. Before long Cao Cao’s other generals
arrived. Sadness and joy mingled in the greetings. They gathered together the
few hundreds of soldiers left and then returned to Luoyang.
When the confederate lords entered Luoyang, Sun Jian, after extinguishing the
fires, camped within the walls, his own tent being set up near the Dynastic
Temple. His people cleared away the debris and closed the rifted tombs. The
gates were barred. On the site of the Dynastic Temple he put up a mat shed
containing three apartments, and here he begged the lords to meet and replace
the sacred tablets, with solemn sacrifices and prayers.
This ceremony over, the others left and Sun Jian returned to his camp. That
night the stars and moon vied with each other in brightness. As Sun Jian sat in
the open air looking up at the heavens, he noticed a mist spreading over the
stars of the Constellation Draco.
“The Emperor’s star is dulled,” said Sun Jian with a sigh. “No wonder a
rebellious minister disturbs the state, the people sit in dust and ashes, and
the capital is a waste.”
And his tears began to fall.
Then a soldier pointing to the south said, “There is a beam of colored light
rising from a well!”
Sun Jian bade his people light torches and descend into the well. Soon they
brought up the corpse of a woman, not in the least decayed although it had been
there many days. She was dressed in Palace clothing and from her neck hung an
embroidered bag. Opening this a red box was found, with a golden lock, and when
the box was opened, they saw a jade seal, square in shape, four inches each
way. On it were delicately engraved five dragons intertwined. One corner had
been broken off and repaired with gold. There were eight characters in the seal
style of engraving which interpreted read:
I have received the command from Heaven: May my time be always long and
prosperous.
Sun Jian showed this to his adviser, General Cheng Pu, who at once recognized
it as the Imperial Hereditary Seal of the Emperor.
Cheng Pu said, “This seal has a history. In olden days Bian He saw a phoenix
sitting on a certain stone at the foot of the Jing Mountains. He offered the
stone at court. The King of Chu split open the stone and found a piece of jade.
In the twenty-sixth year of Qin Dynasty (BC 221), a jade cutter made a seal
from it, and Li Si, the First Emperor’s Prime Minister, engraved the
characters. Two years later, while the First Emperor was sailing in Dongting
Lake, a terrific storm arrived. The Emperor threw the seal to the water as a
propitiatory offering, and the storm immediately ceased. Ten years later again,
when the First Emperor was making a progress and had reached Huaying, an old
man by the road side handed a seal to one of the attendants saying, ‘This is
now restored to the ancestral dragon!’ and had then disappeared. Thus the
jewel returned to Qin.
“The next year the First Emperor died. Later Zi Ying, the last Emperor of Qin
and grandson of the First Emperor, presented the seal to Liu Bang the Supreme
Ancestor, the founder of Han Dynasty. Two hundred years later, in Wang Mang’s
rebellion, the Emperor’s mother, Lady Yuan, struck two of the rebels, Wang
Xun and Su Xian, with the seal and broke off a corner, which was repaired with
gold. Liu Xiu the Latter Han Founder got possession of it at Yiyang, and it has
been regularly bequeathed hereafter.
“I heard this treasured seal had been lost during the trouble in the Palace
when the Ten Regular Attendants hurried off the Emperor. It was missed on His
Majesty’s return. Now my lord has it and certainly will come to the imperial
dignity. But you must not remain here in the north. Quickly go home to the
south of the Great River, where you can lay plans for the accomplishment of the
great design.”
“Your words exactly accord with my thoughts,” said Sun Jian. “Tomorrow I
will make an excuse that I am unwell and get away.”
The soldiers were told to keep the discovery a secret. But one among them was a
compatriot of the elected chief of the confederacy —-Yuan Shao. He thought
this might be of great advantage to him, so he stole away out of the camp and
betrayed his master. He went to Yuan Shao’s camp, informed the secret, and
received a liberal reward. Yuan Shao kept the informant in his own camp.
Next morning Sun Jian came to take leave, saying, “I am rather unwell and
wish to return to Changsha.”
Yuan Shao laughed, saying, “I know what you are suffering from: It is called
the Imperial Hereditary Seal!”
This was a shock to Sun Jian, and he paled but said, “Whence these words?”
Yuan Shao said, “The armies were raised for the good of the state and to
relieve it from oppression. The seal is state property; and since you have got
hold of it, you should publicly hand it over to me as chief. When Dong Zhuo has
been slain, it must go back to the government. What do you mean by concealing
it and going away?”
“How could the seal get into my hands?” said Sun Jian.
“Where is the article out of the well near the Hall of Paragons?”
“I have it not: Why harass me thus?”
“Quickly produce it, or it will be the worst for you!”
Sun Jian pointing toward the heavens as an oath said, “If I have this jewel
and am hiding it myself, may my end be unhappy and my death violent!”
The lords all said, “After an oath like this, we think he cannot have it.”
Then Yuan Shao called out his informant.
“When you pulled that thing out of the well, was this man there?” asked he
of Sun Jian.
Sun Jian’s anger burst forth, and he sprang forward to kill the man.
Yuan Shao also drew his sword, saying, “You touch that soldier and it is an
insult to me!”
Behind Sun Jian, Generals Cheng Pu, Huang Gai, and Han Dang stepped forth;
behind Yuan Shao, Generals Yan Liang and Wen Chou were ready to act. In a
moment on all sides swords flew from their scabbards. But the confusion was
stayed by the efforts of the others, and Sun Jian left the assembly. Soon he
broke up his camp and marched to his own place.
Yuan Shao was not satisfied. He wrote to Jingzhou Region and sent the letter by
a trusty hand to tell Imperial Protector Liu Biao to stop Sun Jian and take
away the seal.
Just after this came the news of the defeat and misfortune of Cao Cao, and when
he was coming home, Yuan Shao sent out to welcome him and conduct him into
camp. They also prepared a feast to console him.
During the feast Cao Cao said sadly, “My object was for the public good, and
all you gentlemen nobly supported me. My plan was to get Yuan Shao with his
Henei troops to approach Mengching; and my force at Qiao to keep Chenggao;
while the others of you to hold Suanzao, to close the passes of Huanyuan and
Daigu, and to take possession of the granaries, to control the points of
vantage, and thus to secure the Capital District. I planned for Yuan Shu with
his Nanyang army to occupy the counties of Danshi and Xilin and go into Wu Pass
to help the three support areas. All were to fortify their positions and not to
fight. Advantage lay in a diverse military coalition that could show the empire
a possibility of dealing with the rebellion. We could have convinced the people
to side with us against Dong Zhuo. Victory would have been ours at once. But
then came delays and doubts and inaction, and the confidence of the people was
lost, and I am ashamed.”
No reply was possible and the guests dispersed. Cao Cao saw that the others
mistrusted him, and in his heart knew that nothing could be accomplished. So he
led off his force to Yanzhou Region.
Then Gongsun Zan said to Liu Bei, “This Yuan Shao is an incapable, and things
will turns chaotic. We had better go too.”
So he broke camp and went north. At Pingyuan he left Liu Bei in command and
went to strengthen his own position and refresh his troops.
The Imperial Protector of Yanzhou, Liu Dai, wished to borrow grain of the
Governor of Dongjun, Qiao Mao. Being denied, Liu Dai attacked the camp, killed
Qiao Mao and took over all his army. Yuan Shao seeing the confederacy breaking
up also marched away and went east.
On the way home, Sun Jian was passing through Jingzhou Region. The Imperial
Protector of Jingzhou, Liu Biao, was a scion of the imperial house and a native
of Shanyang. As a young man he had made friends with many famous people, and he
and his companions were called the Eight Wise Ones. The other seven were:
.1. Chen Xiang from Runan
.2. Fan Pang from Runan
.3. Kong Yu from Luting
.4. Fan Kang from Bohai
.5. Tan Fu from Shanyang
.6. Zhang Jian from Shanyang
.7. Cen Zhi from Nanyang
Liu Biao was friends with all these. He had three famous persons who helped him
in the government of his region. They were Kuai Liang and Kuai Yue from
Yanping, and Cai Mao from Xiangyang.
When Yuan Shao’s letter detailing the fault of Sun Jian arrived, Liu Biao
ordered Kuai Yue and Cai Mao with ten thousand soldiers to bar the way. When
Sun Jian drew near, the force was arranged in fighting order and the leaders
were in the front.
“Why are you thus barring the road with armed troops?” asked Sun Jian.
“Why do you, a servant of Han, secrete the Emperor’s special seal? Leave it
with me at once and you go free,” said Kuai Yue.
Sun Jian angrily ordered out General Huang Gai. On the other side Cai Mao rode
forth with his sword set to strike. But after a few bouts Huang Gai dealt Cai
Mao a blow with the iron whip on the armor just over the heart. Cai Mao turned
his steed and fled, and Sun Jian got through with a sudden rush.
However, there arose the sound of gongs and drums on the hills behind, and
there was Liu Biao in person with a large army.
Sun Jian rode straight up to him and bowing low spoke, “Why did you, on the
faith of a letter from Yuan Shao, try to coerce the chief of a neighboring
region?”
“You have concealed the state jewel, and I want you to restore it,” was Liu
Biao’s reply.
“If I have this thing, may I die a violent death!”
“If you want me to believe you, let me search your baggage.”
“What force have you that you dare come to flout me thus?”
And only Liu Biao’s prompt retirement prevented a battle. Sun Jian proceeded
on his way. But from the rear of the second hill an ambush suddenly discovered
itself, and Kuai Yue and Cai Mao were still pursuing. Sun Jian seemed entirely
hemmed in.
What does a man to hold the state jewel for,
If its possession lead to strife?
How Sun Jian got clear of the difficulty will presently be told.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 7 ****
At the close of the last chapter Sun Jian was surrounded. However, aided by
Cheng Pu, Huang Gai, and Han Dang, he eventually fought his way through, though
with the loss of more than half his troops. Sun Jian returned to the South
Land, the territories southeast of the Great River. Henceforward Sun Jian and
Liu Biao were open enemies.
Yuan Shao was in Henei. Being short of supplies, he sent to borrow from the
Imperial Protector of Jizhou, Han Fu, whence he obtained the wherewithal to
support his army.
Then one of Yuan Shao’s advisers, Peng Ji, said to him, “You are really the
strongest power here about. Why then depend upon another for food? Jizhou
Region is rich and wide. Why not seize it?”
“I have no good plan,” replied Yuan Shao.
“You could secretly send a letter to Gongsun Zan, asking him to attack,
promising him your support. Imperial Protector Han Fu of Jizhou, being
incapable, must ask you to take over his region, and you will get it without
lifting a finger.”
So the letter was sent. When Gongsun Zan saw therein the proposal to make a
joint attack and divide the territory, he agreed to give his help. In the
meantime Yuan Shao had sent to warn Han Fu of Gongsun Zan’s threat. Han Fu
sought advice from Counselors Xun Chang and Xin Ping.
Xun Chang said, “Governor Gongsun Zan of Beiping is commanding a huge and
strong army. If he came to attack us, we could not stand against him,
especially if he had the help of Liu Bei and his brothers. At present, Yuan
Shao is bolder than most, and he has many able and famous leaders under him.
You cannot do better than ask him to assist in administering this region. Yuan
Shao will certainly treat you with generosity, and you need have no fear from
Gongsun Zan.”
Han Fu agreed and sent a message to Yuan Shao by the hand of Guan Chun.
But Commander Geng Wu remonstrated with his master, saying, “Yuan Shao is a
needy man with a hungry army and as dependent on us for existence as an infant
in the arms of its mother. Stop the flow of milk and the infant dies. Why
should you hand the region over to him? It is nothing less than letting a tiger
into the sheepfold!”
Han Fu replied, “I am one of the clients of the Yuan family, and I know the
abilities of Yuan Shao, which is far better than mine! Why are you all so
jealous? The ancients counseled yielding to the sage.”
Geng Wu sighed, “Jizhou is lost!”
When the news got abroad, more than thirty officers of Jizhou left their
employment and the city. However, Geng Wu and Guan Chun hid in the suburbs to
await the arrival of Yuan Shao.
They had not long to wait. Some days later, Yuan Shao with his soldiers came,
and Geng Wu and Guan Chun tried to assassinate him with knives. This attempt
failed. Yuan Shao’s generals, Yan Liang and Wen Chou, beheaded Geng Wu and
Guan Chun instantly. Thus both of them died, and the object of their hatred
entered Jizhou City.
Yuan Shao’s first act was to confer on Han Fu a high sounding title —-
General Who Demonstrates Grand and Vigor Courage in Arms —-, but the
administration was entrusted to four of Yuan Shao’s confidants —-Tian Feng,
Ju Shou, Xu You, and Peng Ji —-who speedily deprived the Imperial Protector
of all power. Full of chagrin, Han Fu soon abandoned all, even his family, and
rode alone to take refuge with the Governor of Chenliu, Zhang Miao.
Hearing of Yuan Shao’s invasion, Gongsun Zan sent his brother, Gongsun Yue,
to see the usurper and demand his share of the region.
“I want to see your elder brother himself. He and I have things to
discuss,” said Yuan Shao.
Thus Gongsun Yue was sent back. But after traveling some fifteen miles on the
homeward road, Gongsun Yue saw a group of soldiers appear.
“We are guards of Prime Minister Dong Zhuo!” cried the soldiers.
Instantly, Gongsun Yue was killed by a flight of arrows. Those of Gongsun
Yue’s followers who escaped carried the news to their late master’s
brother.
Gongsun Zan was very angry and said, “Yuan Shao prevailed on me to attack,
and now he has taken possession! Also he pretends the murderers of my brother
were not his people! Shall I not avenge my brother’s injury?”
Gongsun Zan brought up all his force to the attack. Learning the movement, Yuan
Shao sent out his army, and they met at River Pan. They halted on opposite
sides of the river, over which was a bridge.
Gongsun Zan took his station on the bridge and cried to his enemy, “Renegade,
how dared you mislead me?”
Yuan Shao rode to the other end of the bridge and, pointing at Gongsun Zan,
replied, “Han Fu yielded place to me because he was unequal to the rule! What
concern is it of yours?”
Gongsun Zan replied, “Formerly you were regarded as loyal and public
spirited, and we chose you chief of the confederacy. Now your deeds prove you
cruel and base and wolf-hearted in behavior! How can you look the world in the
face?”
“Who will capture him?” cried Yuan Shao in a rage.
At once Wen Chou rode out with his spear set. Gongsun Zan rode down the bridge
to the enemy’s side, where the two engaged. Ten bouts showed Gongsun Zan the
terrible power of Wen Chou, and so he drew off. The enemy came on. Gongsun Zan
took refuge within his formation, but Wen Chou cut his way in and rode this way
and that, slaying right and left. The four best of Gongsun Zan’s generals
offered joint battle, but one fell under the first stroke of the doughty
warrior, and the other three fled. Wen Chou followed, clearing through to the
rear of the army. Gongsun Zan made for the mountains.
Wen Chou forced his horse to its utmost pace, crying hoarsely, “Down!
Dismount and surrender!”
Gongsun Zan fled for life. His bow and quiver dropped from his shoulders, his
helmet fell off, and his hair streamed straight behind him as he rode in and
out between the sloping hills. Then his steed stumbled and he was thrown,
rolling over and over to the foot of the slope.
Wen Chou was now very near and poising his spear for the thrust. Then suddenly
came out from the shelter of a grassy mound on the left a general of youthful
mien, but sitting his steed bravely and holding a sturdy spear. He rode
directly at Wen Chou, and Gongsun Zan crawled up the slope to look on.
The new warrior was of middle height with bushy eyebrows and large eyes, a
broad face and a heavy jowl, a youth of commanding presence. The two exchanged
some fifty bouts and yet neither had the advantage. Then Gongsun Zan’s rescue
force came along, and Wen Chou turned and rode away. The warrior did not
pursue.
Gongsun Zan hurried down the hill and asked the young fellow who he was.
He bowed low and replied, “My name is Zhao Zilong from Changshan. I first
served Yuan Shao; but when I saw that he was disloyal to his prince and
careless of the welfare of the people, I left him and I was on my way to offer
service to you. This meeting in this place is most unexpected.”
Gongsun Zan was very pleased, and the two went together to the camp, where they
at once busied themselves with preparations for a new battle.
Next day Gongsun Zan prepared for fight by dividing his army into two wings. He
had five thousand cavalry in the center, all mounted on white horses. Gongsun
Zan had formerly seen service against the northern frontier tribes, the Qiang
Peoples, where he always placed his white horses in the van of his army, and
thus he had won the sobriquet of General Who Commands White Horses. The tribes
held him so much in fear that they always fled as soon as the white horses,
their sacred creatures, appeared.
On Yuan Shao’s side Yan Liang and Wen Chou were Leaders of the Van. Each had
one thousand of archers and crossbowmen. They were set out half on either side,
those on the left to shoot at Gongsun Zan’s right and those on the right to
shoot at his left. In the center was Qu Yi with eight hundred bowmen and ten
thousand of foot and horse. Yuan Shao took command of the reserve force in the
rear.
In this fight Gongsun Zan employed his new adherent Zhao Zilong for the first
time and, as Gongsun Zan did not feel assured of Zhao Zilong’s good faith,
put him in command of a company at the rear. The Van Leader was Yan Guang, and
Gongsun Zan himself commanded the center. He took his place on horseback on the
bridge beside an enormous red standard on which was displayed the words
Commanding General in gold embroidery.
From sunrise to noon the drums rolled for the attack, but Yuan Shao’s army
made no move. Qu Yi made his bowmen hide under their shields. They heard the
roar of explosions, the whistling of arrows, and the rattle of the drums, as
Yan Guang approached from the other side, but Qu Yi and his men lay closer than
ever and never stirred. They waited till Yan Guang had got close on them and
then, as the sound of a bomb rent the air, the whole eight hundred men let fly
their arrows in a cloud. Yan Guang was quite taken aback and would have
retired, but Qu Yi rode furiously toward him, whirled up his sword and cut him
down.
So Gongsun Zan’s army lost that battle. The two wings that should have come
to the rescue were kept back by the bowmen under Yan Liang and Wen Chou. Yuan
Shao’s troops advanced right up to the bridge. Then Qu Yi rode forward, slew
the standard bearer, and hacked through the staff of the embroidered banner.
Seeing this, Gongsun Zan turned his steed and galloped away.
Qu Yi followed. But just as he caught up the fugitive, there came prancing
forth Zhao Zilong, who rode directly at him with spear ready to strike. After a
few bouts Qu Yi was laid in the dust. Then Zhao Zilong attacked the soldiers
and turned the tide. Plunging forward on this side, dashing in on that, he went
through as if there were no antagonists and, seeing this, Gongsun Zan turned
and came again into the fight. The final victory was on his side.
From the scouts sent to find out how the battle went, Yuan Shao heard the good
news of Qu Yi’s success in slaying the standard bearer, capturing the flag,
and his pursuit. So Yuan Shao took no further care but rode out with Tian Feng
and a few guards to look on at the enemy and enjoy his victory.
“Ha ha!” Yuan Shao laughed. “Gongsun Zan is an incapable!”
But even as Yuan Shao spoke, he saw in front the redoubtable Zhao Zilong. His
guards hastened to prepare their bows, but before they could shoot, Zhao Zilong
was in their midst, and men were falling before him wherever he went. The
others fled. Gongsun Zan’s army then gathered round and hemmed in Yuan Shao.
Tian Feng then said to his master, “Sir, take refuge in this empty building
here!”
But Yuan Shao dashed his helmet to the ground, crying, “The brave person
rather faces death in the battle than seeks safety behind a wall!”
This bold speech gave new courage to his soldiers who now fought fiercely and
with such success that Zhao Zilong could nowhere force his way in. Yuan Shao
was soon reinforced by the arrival of his main body and Yan Liang, and the two
armies pressed forward. Zhao Zilong could only just get Gongsun Zan safe out of
the press. Then they fought their way back to the bridge. But Yuan Shao’s
troops still came on and fought their way across the bridge, forcing multitudes
of their adversaries into the water, where many were drowned.
Yuan Shao was leading in person and his troops still advanced. But not more
than two miles, for soon a great shouting was heard behind some hills, whence
suddenly burst out a body of troops led by Liu Bei, Guan Yu, and Zhang Fei.
At Pingyuan they had heard of the struggle between their protector and his
enemy, Yuan Shao, and had at once set out to help. Now the three riders, each
with his peculiar weapon, flew straight at Yuan Shao, who was so frightened
that his soul seemed to leave his body and fly beyond the confines of heaven.
His sword fell from his hand and he fled for his life. He was chased across the
bridge when Gongsun Zan called in his army, and they returned to camp.
After the usual greetings Gongsun Zan said, “If you had not come to our help,
we should have been in very bad case.”
Liu Bei and Zhao Zilong were made acquainted with each other, and a warm
affection sprang up from the very first so that they were always together.
Yuan Shao had lost that battle, and Gongsun Zan would not risk another. They
strengthened their defenses, and the armies lay inactive for over a month. In
the meantime news of the fighting had reached Capital Changan, and Dong Zhuo
was told.
His adviser, Li Ru, went to see his master and said, “The two active leaders
of today are Yuan Shao and Gongsun Zan, who are at grips at River Pan. Pretend
you have an imperial command to make peace between them, and both will support
you out of gratitude for your intervention.”
“Good!” said Dong Zhuo.
So he sent Imperial Guardian Ma Midi and Court Administrator Zhao Qi on the
mission. When these men were arriving at the North of Yellow River, Yuan Shao
sent out to welcome them thirty miles from his headquarters and received the
imperial command with the greatest respect. Then the two officers went to
Gongsun Zan and made known their errand. Gongsun Zan sent letters to his
adversary proposing friendship. The two emissaries returned to report their
task accomplished. Gongsun Zan drew off his army. He also sent up a memorial
eulogizing Liu Bei, who was raised to the rank of Governor of Pingyuan.
The farewell between Liu Bei and Zhao Zilong was affecting. They held each
other’s hands a long time, their eyes streaming with tears, and could not
tear themselves apart.
Zhao Zilong said with a sob, “I used to think Gongsun Zan a true hero, but I
see now that he is no different from Yuan Shao. They are both alike.”
“But you are now in his service. We shall surely meet again,” said Liu Bei.
Both men wept freely as they separated.
Now Yuan Shu in Nanyang, hearing that his brother had come into Jizhou, sent to
beg a thousand horses. The request was refused and enmity sprang up between the
brothers. Yuan Shu also sent to Jingzhou to borrow grain, which Imperial
Protector Liu Biao would not send. In his resentment, Yuan Shu wrote to Sun
Jian, Governor of Changsha, trying to get him to attack Liu Biao. The letter
ran like this:
“When Liu Biao stopped you on your way home, it was at the instigation of my
brother. Now the same two have planned to fall upon your territories in the
South Land, wherefore you should at once strike at Liu Biao. I will capture my
brother for you and both resentments will be appeased. You will get Jingzhou,
and I shall have Jizhou.”
“I cannot bear Liu Biao,” said Sun Jian as he finished reading this letter.
“He certainly did bar my way home, and I may wait many years for my revenge
if I let slip this chance!”
He called a council.
“You may not trust Yuan Shu. He is very deceitful,” said Cheng Pu.
“I want revenge on my own part. What care I for his help?” said Sun Jian.
He dispatched Huang Gai to prepare a river fleet, arm and provision them. Big
warships were to take horses on board. The force soon set out.
News of these preparations came to Liu Biao, and he hastily summoned his
advisers and commanders.
Kuai Liang told him to be free from anxiety, and said, “Put General Huang Zu
at the head of the Jiangxia army to make the first attack and you, Sir, support
him with the forces from Xiangyang. Let Sun Jian come riding the rivers and
straddling the lakes: What strength will he have left after arriving here?”
So Liu Biao bade Huang Zu prepare to march, and a great army was assembled.
Here it may be said that Sun Jian had four sons, all the issue of his wife who
was of the Wu family. Their names in order were Sun Ce, Sun Quan, Sun Yi, and
Sun Kuang. Sun Jian had a second wife who was the sister of his first wife. And
the second wife bore him a son and a daughter, the former called Sun Lang, the
latter Sun Ren. Sun Jian had also adopted a son from a Yu family and named him
Sun Hu. And he had a younger brother named Sun Jing.
As Sun Jian was leaving on this expedition, his brother Sun Jing with all his
six sons stood in front of his steed and dissuaded him, saying, “Dong Zhuo is
the real ruler of the state, for the Emperor is a weakling. The whole country
is in rebellion, everyone is scrambling for territory. Our area is
comparatively peaceful, and it is wrong to begin a war merely for the sake of a
little resentment. I pray you, brother, think before you start.”
Sun Jian replied, “Brother, say no more. I desire to make my strength felt
throughout the empire, and shall I not avenge my injuries?”
“Then Father, if you must go, let me accompany you,” said the eldest son
Sun Ce.
This request was granted, and father and son embarked to go to ravage the city
of Fankou.
Now Huang Zu had placed archers and crossbowmen along the river bank. When the
ships approached, a flight of arrows met them. Sun Jian ordered his troops to
remain under cover in the ships, which then sailed to and fro, drawing the fire
for three days. Several times the ships pretended to land, and this drew
showers of arrows from the bank. At last the arrows of the defenders were all
shot away and Sun Jian, who collected them, found he had many myriads. Then
with a fair wind Sun Jian’s troops shot them back to the enemy. Those on the
bank were thrown into great disorder and retired. The army then landed. Two
divisions led by Cheng Pu and Huang Gai set out for Huang Zu’s camp along
different roads, and between them marched Han Dang. Under this triple attack
Huang Zu was worsted. He left Fankou and hastened to Dengcheng.
Leaving the ships under the command of Huang Gai, Sun Jian led the pursuing
force. Huang Zu came out of his city and drew up for battle in the open
country. When Sun Jian had disposed his army, he rode out to the standard. Sun
Ce, clad in armor, placed himself beside his father.
Huang Zu rode out with two generals —-Zhang Hui from Jiangxia and Chen Sheng
from Xiangyang.
Flourishing his whip, Huang Zu abused his enemy, “You swarm of rebels from
the south! Why do you invade the land of a scion of the ruling house?”
Zhang Hui challenged to combat, and Han Dang went out to accept. The two
champions fought thirty bouts, and then Chen Sheng, seeing his fellow general
becoming exhausted, rode to his aid. Sun Jian saw Chen Sheng coming, laid aside
his spear, reached for his bow, and shot an arrow wounding Chen Sheng in the
face. He fell from his horse. Panic seized upon Zhang Hui at the fall of his
comrade, and he could no longer defend himself. Then Han Dang with a slash of
his sword clove Zhang Hui’s skull in twain.
Both having fallen, Cheng Pu galloped up to make prisoner of Huang Zu, who
threw off his helmet, slipped from his steed, and mingled for safety among his
troops. Sun Jian led on the attack and drove the enemy to the Han River where
he ordered Huang Gai to move the fleet upriver and moor there.
Huang Zu led his defeated troops back and told Liu Biao, saying, “Sun Jian
was too strong for my army!”
Kuai Liang was called in to advise, and he said, “Our newly defeated soldiers
have no heart for fighting now. Therefore we must fortify our position, while
we seek help from Yuan Shao. Then we can extricate ourselves.”
“A stupid move!” said Cai Mao. “The enemy is at the city gates: Shall we
fold our hands and wait to be slain? Give me troops and I will go out and fight
to the finish!”
So Cai Mao was placed in command of ten thousand troops and went out to the
Xian Hills where he drew up his battle line. Sun Jian led the invaders, now
flushed with success.
When Cai Mao approached, Sun Jian looked at him and said, “He is brother-in-
law to Liu Biao. Who will capture him?”
Cheng Pu set his iron-spined lance and rode out. After a few bouts Cai Mao
turned and fled. Sun Jian’s army rode in and slaughtered till corpses filled
the countryside, and Cai Mao rushed back and took refuge in Xiangyang.
Kuai Liang said, “Cai Mao ought to be put to death by military law! This
defeat was due to his obstinacy.”
But Liu Biao was unwilling to punish the brother of his newly wedded wife.
Sun Jian surrounded Xiangyang and assailed the walls daily. One day a fierce
gale sprang up, and the pole bearing his standard was broken.
“Very inauspicious!” said Han Dang. “We ought to go back.”
Sun Jian said, “I have won every battle and the city is on the point of
falling. Shall I return because the wind felled a flagstaff?”
He flouted the advice and attacked the walls still more vigorously.
Within the city the defenders had seen an omen.
Kuai Liang told Liu Biao, “Last night I saw that a great star fall into the
sky corresponding to Sun Jian’s territory. I calculated that it inferred the
fall of Sun Jian.”
Then Kuai Liang advised Liu Biao to seek help from Yuan Shao as quickly as
possible.
So Liu Biao wrote. Then he asked who would undertake to fight his way through
the blockade with the letter. One Lu Gong, a warrior of great strength, offered
himself for this service.
Kuai Liang said, “If you undertake this service, listen to my advice. You
will have five hundred soldiers: Choose good bowmen. Dash through the enemy’s
formation and make for Xian Hills. You will be pursued; but send a hundred
soldiers up the hill to prepare large stones, and place a hundred archers in
ambush in the woods. These are not to flee from the pursuers but to beguile
them along devious ways round to the place where the boulders have been
prepared. There stones will be rolled down and arrows shot. If you succeed,
fire off a series of bombs as a signal, and the armies in the city will come
out to help. If you are not pursued, get away as fast as possible. Tonight will
be suitable as there is very little moon. Start at dusk.”
Lu Gong having received these directions, prepared his force to carry them out.
As soon as day began to close in, he went quietly out at the east gate.
Sun Jian was in his tent when he heard shouting, and a soldier came to report:
“There was a group of horsemen going out from the city!”
Sun Jian at once mounted and rode out with thirty horsemen to discover the
cause. Lu Gong’s troops had already hidden themselves in the thick woods. Sun
Jian rode ahead of his escort, and soon he found himself alone and close to the
enemy. He called out to them to halt. Lu Gong at once turned back and came as
if to fight. But they had only exchanged a single pass when Lu Gong again fled,
taking the road among the hills. Sun Jian followed but soon lost sight of his
foe.
Sun Jian turned up the hill. Then the gongs clanged and down the hills fell
showers of stones, while from among the trees the arrows flew in clouds. Sun
Jian was hit by several arrows and a huge stone crushed in his head. Both he
and his steed were killed. Sun Jian was only thirty-seven years old at his
death.
His escort was overpowered and every man of them slain. Then Lu Gong let off a
series of bombs, the sign of success, as agreed. At this signal Huang Zu, Kuai
Yue, and Cai Mao led three armies out of the city and fell upon the South Land
troops, throwing them into the utmost confusion.
When Huang Gai heard the sound of battle, he led up the troops from the ships.
He met Huang Zu and took Huang Zu prisoner after a brief fight.
Cheng Pu set out to bear the sad news to Sun Ce. While he was seeking a way
out, he came across Lu Gong. Cheng Pu at once put his horse at full speed and
engaged Lu Gong. After a few bouts Lu Gong went down under a spear thrust. The
battle became chaotic and continued till daylight broke, when each drew off his
army. Liu Biao withdrew into the city.
When Sun Ce returned to the river, he heard that his father had perished in the
fight, and his body had been carried within the enemy’s walls. He uttered a
great cry, and the army joined him with wailing and tears.
“How can I return home leaving my father’s corpse with them?” cried Sun
Ce.
Huang Gai said, “We have Huang Zu as our prisoner. Let one enter the city and
discuss peace, giving up our prisoner for our lord’s body.”
He had barely finished speaking when an officer in the army, Huan Ji, offered
himself as messenger, saying, “I am an old friend of Liu Biao. I volunteer to
take the mission.”
Sun Ce agreed. So Huan Ji went and peace was discussed.
Liu Biao told Huan Ji, saying, “The body is already laid in a coffin and
ready to be delivered as soon as Huang Zu returned. Let us both cease fighting
and never again invade each other’s territories.”
Huan Ji thanked him and took his leave.
But as Huan Ji went down the steps, Kuai Liang suddenly broke in, saying,
“No, no! Let me speak and I will see to it that not a single enemy can
survive. I pray you first put this man to death and then to employ my means.”
Pursuing his enemy, Sun Jian dies;
On a peaceful mission, Huan Ji is threatened.
The fate of the ambassador will be disclosed in a later chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 8 ****
youths. Seize this moment of weakness to break into the South Land, and it is
yours in one beat of the drum. If you return the corpse and make peace, you
give them time to grow powerful, and evil will ensue to Jingzhou.”
“How can I leave Huang Zu in their hands?” said Liu Biao.
“Why not sacrifice this blundering warrior for a region?”
“But he is my dear friend, and to abandon him is wrong.”
So Huan Ji was allowed to return to his own side with the understanding that
Sun Jian’s dead body should be given in exchange. Sun Ce freed his prisoner,
brought away his father’s coffin, and the fighting ceased. Sun Jian was
interred in the plains of Que. When the ceremonies were over, Sun Ce led his
army home again.
In Changsha, one of the territories south of the Great River, Sun Ce set
himself to the task of ruling well. Being humble and generous, he invited to
his side humans of wisdom and valor and so bore himself that all the best and
bravest of the country gathered about him.
Meanwhile, Dong Zhuo at Capital Changan, when he heard of the death of the
turbulent Sun Jian, said, “An evil that pressed hard upon my heart has been
removed!”
He asked what children Sun Jian had left, and when they told him the eldest was
but seventeen, he dismissed all anxiety from his thoughts.
From this time forward his arrogance and domineering spirit waxed worse and
worse. He styled himself “Imperial Rector”, a name full of honor, and in
all his behavior aped imperial state. He created his younger brother, Dong Min,
Lord of Huazhou and made him Commander of the Left Army. A nephew, Dong Huang,
was made Court Counselor and placed in command of the Palace Guard, and
everyone of his clan, young or old, was ennobled. Eighty miles from the capital
Dong Zhuo laid out a city called Meiwo, an exact replica of Changan, with its
palaces, granaries, treasuries, and magazines, and employed a quarter of a
million people to build it. Here he accumulated supplies sufficient for twenty
years. He selected eight hundred of the most beautiful maidens and sent them to
dwell in his new city. The stores of wealth in every form were incalculable.
All his family and retainers found quarters in this city.
Dong Zhuo visited his city at intervals of a month or so, and every visit was
like an imperial progress, with booths by the roadside to refresh the officials
and courtiers who attended him to the northwest Royal Gate and saw him start.
On one occasion Dong Zhuo spread a great feast for all those assembled to
witness his departure; and while it was in progress, there arrived a large
number of rebels from the north who had voluntarily surrendered. Dong Zhuo had
them brought before him as he sat at table and meted out to them wanton
cruelties. The hands of this one were lopped off, the feet of that; one had his
eyes gouged out; another lost his tongue. Some were boiled to death. Shrieks of
agony arose to the very heavens, and the courtiers were faint with terror. But
the author of the misery ate and drank, chatted and smiled as if nothing was
going on.
Another day Dong Zhuo was presiding at a great gathering of officials who were
seated in two long rows. After the wine had gone up and down several times, Lu
Bu entered and whispered a few words in his master’s ear.
Dong Zhuo smiled and said, “He was always so. Take Minister of Works Zhang
Wan outside!”
The others all turned pale. In a little time a serving man brought the head of
their fellow guest on a red dish and showed it to their host. They nearly died
with fright.
“Do not fear,” said Dong Zhuo smiling. “Minister Zhang Wan was in league
with Yuan Shu to assassinate me. A letter he wrote fell by mistake into the
hands of my son, so I have had him put to death. You gentlemen, who have no
reason, need have no fear.”
The officials hastened to disperse. One of them, Minister of the Interior Wang
Yun, who had witnessed all this, returned to his palace very pensive and much
distressed. The same evening, a bright moonlight night, he took his staff and
went strolling in his private garden. Standing near one of the creeper
trellises, he gazed up at the sky and the tears rolled down his cheeks.
Suddenly he heard a rustle in the Peony Pavilion and someone sighing deeply.
Stealthily creeping near, he saw there one of the household singing girls named
Diao Chan.
This maiden had been brought up in his palace, where she had been taught to
sing and dance. At twenty-one, she was a pretty and clever girl whom Wang Yun
regarded more as a daughter than a dependant.
After listening for some time, Wang Yun suddenly called out, “What mischief
are you up to there, you naughty girl?”
The maiden dropped on her knees in terror, saying, “Would thy unworthy
handmaid dare to do anything wrong?”
“Then what are you sighing about out here in the darkness?”
“May thy handmaid speak from the bottom of her heart?”
“Tell me the whole truth. Do not conceal anything.”
And the girl said, “Thy handmaid has been the recipient of bountiful
kindness. She has been taught to sing and dance and been treated so kindly that
were she torn in pieces for her lord’s sake, it would not repay a thousandth
part. She has noticed lately that her lord’s brows have been knit in distress
and knows it is on account of the state troubles. But she has not dared to ask.
This evening he seemed sadder than ever, and she was miserable on her lord’s
account. But she did not know she would be seen. Could she be of any use, she
would not shrink from a myriad deaths.”
A sudden idea came to Wang Yun, and he stuck the ground with his staff. And he
said, “Who would think that the fate of Han lay in your palm? Come with
me!”
The girl followed him into the house. There he dismissed all the waiting
attendants, placed Diao Chan on a chair, and bowed before her. She was
frightened and threw herself on the ground, asking in terror what it all meant.
Said Wang Yun, “You can sympathize with the people of Han!”
And the fount of his tears opened afresh.
“My lord, as thy handmaid said just now, use her in any way: Thy handmaid
will never shrink,” said the girl.
Wang Yun knelt, saying, “The people are on the brink of destruction, the
prince and his officers are in jeopardy, and you, you are the only savior. That
wretch Dong Zhuo wants to depose the Emperor, and not a person among us can
find means to stop him. Now he has a son, a bold warrior it is true, but both
father and son have a weakness for beauty, and I am going to use what I may
call the ‘chaining plan’. I shall first propose you in marriage to Lu Bu
and then, after you are betrothed, I shall present you to Dong Zhuo, and you
will take every opportunity to force them asunder and turn sway their
countenances from each other, cause the son to kill his adopted father and so
put an end to the great evil. Thus you may restore the altars of the land that
it may live again. All this lies within your power: Will you do it?”
“Thy handmaid has promised not to recoil from death itself. You may use my
poor self in any way, and I must do my best.”
“But if this gets abroad then we are all lost!”
“Fear not,” said she. “If thy handmaid does not show gratitude, may she
perish beneath a myriad swords!”
“Thank you, thank you!” said Wang Yun.
Then Wang Yun took from the family treasury many pearls and bade a cunning
jeweler make therewith a fine golden headdress, which was sent as a present to
Lu Bu. He was delighted and came to thank the donor. When Lu Bu arrived, he was
met at the gate by Wang Yun himself and within found a table full of dainties
for his delectation. He was conducted into a private apartment and placed in
the seat of honor.
Lu Bu said, “I am but a simple officer in the palace of a minister. You are
an exalted officer of state. Why am I treated thus?”
“Because in the whole land there is no hero your equal. Poor I bow not to an
officer’s rank; poor I bow to his ability.”
This gratified Lu Bu mightily, and his host continued to praise and flatter and
ply him with wine and to talk of the virtues of the Prime Minister and his
henchman.
Lu Bu laughed and drank huge goblets.
Presently most of the attendants were sent away, only a few kept to press the
guest to drink.
When the guest was very mellow, Wang Yun suddenly said, “Let her come in!”
Soon appeared two attendants, dressed in white, leading between them the
exquisite and fascinating Diao Chan.
“Who is this?” said Lu Bu startled into sobriety.
“This is my little girl, Diao Chan. You will not be annoyed at my
familiarity, will you? But you have been so very friendly, I thought you would
like to see her.”
Wang Yun bade Diao Chan present a goblet of wine, and her eyes met those of the
warrior.
Wang Yun feigning intoxication said, “My child begs you, General, to take a
cup or two. We all depend upon you, all our house.”
Lu Bu begged Diao Chan to sit down. She pretended to wish to retire.
Her master pressed her to remain, saying, “The General is a dear friend. You
may stay.”
So she took a seat modestly near her master.
Lu Bu kept his gaze fixed upon the maid, while he swallowed cup after cup of
wine.
“I should like to present her to you as a handmaid: Would you accept?” said
Wang Yun.
The guest started up.
“If that is so, you may rely upon my abject gratitude,” said Lu Bu.
“We will choose a propitious day ere long and send her to the palace.”
Lu Bu was overjoyed. He could not keep his eyes off Diao Chan, and loving
glances flashed from her liquid eyes.
However the time came for the guest to leave, and Wang Yun said, “I would ask
you to remain the night, but the Prime Minister might suspect something.”
Lu Bu thanked him again and again and departed.
Some few days later when Wang Yun was at court and Lu Bu was absent, Wang Yun
bowed low before Dong Zhuo and said, “I wish that you would deign to come to
dine at my lowly cottage: Could your noble thought bend that way?”
“Should you invite me, I would certainly hasten,” was the reply.
Wang Yun thanked him. Then Wang Yun went home and prepared in the reception
hall a feast in which figured every delicacy from land and sea. Beautiful
embroideries surrounded the chief seat in the center, and elegant curtains were
hung within and without. At noon next day, when Dong Zhuo arrived, Wang Yun met
him at the gate in full court costume. Wang Yun stood by while Dong Zhuo
stepped out of his chariot, and Dong Zhuo and a host of one hundred armed
guards crowded into the hall. Dong Zhuo took his seat at the top, his suite
fell into two lines right and left, while Wang Yun stood humbly at the lower
end. Dong Zhuo bade his people conduct Wang Yun to a place beside himself.
Said Wang Yun, “The great Prime Minister’s abundant virtue is as the high
mountains. Neither the ancient sages —-Yi Yin and the Duke of Zhou —-could
attain thereto.”
Dong Zhuo smiled. They bore in the dishes and the wine, and the music began.
Wang Yun plied his guest with assiduous flattery and studied deference. When it
grew late and the wine had done its work, Dong Zhuo was invited to the inner
chamber. So he sent away his guards and went.
Here the host raised a goblet and drank to his guest, saying, “From my youth
up I have understood something of astrology and have been studying the aspect
of the heavens. I read that the days of Han are numbered, and that the great
Prime Minister’s merits command the regard of all the world, as when King
Shun succeeded King Yao, and King Yu continued the work of King Shun, all by
the strength of their own merits, conforming to the mind of Heaven and the
desire of people.”
“How dare I expect this?” said Dong Zhuo.
“From the days of old, those who walk in the way have replaced those who
deviate therefrom; those who lack virtue have fallen before those who possess
it. Can one escape fate?”
“If indeed the decree of Heaven devolves on me, you shall be held the first
in merit!” said Dong Zhuo.
Wang Yun bowed. Then lights were brought in and all the attendants were
dismissed, save the serving maids to hand the wine. So the evening went on.
Presently Wang Yun said, “The music of these everyday musicians is too
commonplace for your ear, but there happens to be in the house a little maid
that might please you.”
“Excellent!” said the guest.
Then a curtain was lowered. The shrill tones of reed instruments rang through
the room, and presently some attendants led forward Diao Chan, who then danced
on the outside of the curtain.
A poem praises her:
For a palace this maiden was born,
So timid, so graceful, so slender,
Like a tiny bird flitting at morn
Over the dew-laden lily buds tender.
Were this exquisite maid only mine,
For never a mansion I’d pine.
Another poem runs thus:
The music falls, the dancer comes, a swallow gliding in,
A dainty little damsel, soft as silk;
Her beauty captivates the guest yet saddens him within,
For he must soon depart and leave her there.
She smiles; no gold could buy that smile, no other smiled so,
No need to deck her form with jewels rare.
But when the dance is over and coy glances come and go,
Then who shall be the chosen of the fair?
The dance ended. Dong Zhuo bade them lead the maiden in, and she came, bowing
low as she approached him. He was much taken with her beauty and modest grace.
“Who is she?” said Dong Zhuo.
“A singing girl. Her name is Diao Chan.”
“Then can she sing?”
The master bade her sing, and she did so to the accompaniment of castanets.
There is a measure describing her youthful beauty:
You stand, a dainty maiden,
Your cherry lips so bright,
Your teeth so pearly white,
Your fragrant breath love-laden;
Yet is your tongue a sword;
Cold death is the reward
Of loving thee, O maiden!
Dong Zhuo was delighted and praised her warmly. She was told to present a
goblet of wine to the guest which he took from her hands and then asked her
age.
She replied, “Thy unworthy handmaid is twenty-one.”
“A perfect fairy!” said Dong Zhuo.
Then Wang Yun rose and said, “If the Prime Minister would not mind, I should
like to offer him this little maid.”
“How could I be grateful enough for such a kindness!”
“She would be most fortunate if she could be your servant,” said Wang Yun.
Dong Zhuo thanked his host warmly.
Then the orders were given to prepare a closed carriage and convey Diao Chan to
the Prime Minister’s palace.
Soon after Dong Zhuo took his leave, and Wang Yun accompanied him the whole
way.
After he had taken leave, Wang Yun mounted to ride homeward. Half way he met
two lines of guards with red lamps who were escorting Lu Bu who was on
horseback and armed with his trident halberd.
Seeing Wang Yun, Lu Bu at once reined in, stopped, seized him by the sleeve,
and said angrily, “You promised Diao Chan to me, and now you have given her
to the Prime Minister: What foolery is this?”
Wang Yun checked him, saying, “This is no place to talk. I pray you come to
my house.”
So they went together, and Wang Yun led Lu Bu into a private room.
After the usual exchange of polite greetings, Wang Yun said, “Why do you find
fault with me, General?”
“Somebody told me that you had sent Diao Chan to the Prime Minister’s
palace in a covered carriage: What does it mean?”
“Of course you do not understand. Yesterday when I was at court, the Prime
Minister told me he had something to talk to me about in my own house. So
naturally I prepared for his coming, and while we were at dinner he said, ‘I
have heard something of a girl named Diao Chan whom you have promised to my son
Lu Bu. I thought it was mere rumor so I wanted to ask if it was true. Beside I
should like to see her.’ I could not say no, so she came in and made her bow
to the lord of lords. Then he said that it was a lucky day and he would take
her away with him and betroth her to you. Just think, Sir: When the Prime
Minister had come himself, could I stop him?”
“You were not so very wrong,” said Lu Bu. “But for a time I had
misunderstood you. I owe you an apology.”
“The girl has a small trousseau, which I will send as soon as she has gone
over to your dwelling.”
Lu Bu thanked him and went away. Next day he went into the palace to find out
the truth, but could hear nothing. Then he made his way into the private
quarters and questioned the maids. Presently one told him that the Imperial
Rector had brought home a new bedfellow the night before and was not up yet. Lu
Bu was very angry. Next he crept round behind his master’s sleeping
apartment.
By this time Diao Chan had risen and was dressing her hair at the window.
Looking out she saw a long shadow fall across the little lake. She recognized
the headdress, and peeping around she saw it was indeed no other than Lu Bu.
Thereupon she contracted her eyebrows, simulating the deepest grief, and with
her dainty handkerchief she wiped her eyes again and again. Lu Bu stood
watching her a long time.
Soon after he went in to give morning greeting. Dong Zhuo was sitting in the
reception room.
Seeing his henchman, Dong Zhuo asked, “Is there anything new?”
“Nothing,” was the reply.
Lu Bu waited while Dong Zhuo took his morning meal. As he stood beside his
master, he glanced over at the curtain and saw a woman there behind the screen
showing a half face from time to time and throwing amorous glances at him. He
felt it was his beloved, and his thoughts flew to her. Presently Dong Zhuo
noticed his expression and began to feel suspicious.
“If there is nothing, you may go,” said Dong Zhuo.
Lu Bu sulkily withdrew.
Dong Zhuo now thought of nothing but his new mistress and for more than a month
neglected all affairs, devoting himself entirely to pleasure. Once he was a
little indisposed, and Diao Chan was constantly at his side, never even
undressing to show her solicitude. She gratified his every whim. Dong Zhuo grew
more and more fond of her.
One day Lu Bu went to inquire after his father’s health. Dong Zhuo was
asleep, and Diao Chan was sitting at the head of his couch. Leaning forward she
gazed at the visitor, with one hand pointed to her heart, the other at Dong
Zhuo asleep, and her tears fell. Lu Bu felt heartbroken. Dong Zhuo drowsily
opened his eyes; and seeing his son’s gaze fixed on something behind him, he
turned over and saw who it was.
He angrily rebuked his son, saying, “Dare you make love to my beauty?”
He told the servants to turn Lu Bu out, shouting, “Never let him enter here
again!”
Lu Bu went off home very wrath. Meeting Li Ru, he told Li Ru the cause of his
anger.
The adviser hastened to see his master and said, “Sir, you aspire to be ruler
of the empire. Why then for a small fault do you blame the General? If he turns
against you, it is all over.”
“Then what can I do?” said Dong Zhuo.
“Recall him tomorrow; treat him well; overwhelm him with gifts and fair
words; and all will be well.”
So Dong Zhuo did so. He sent for Lu Bu and was very gracious and said, “I was
irritable and hasty yesterday owing to my illness and I wronged you, I know.
Forgive me.”
He gave Lu Bu three hundred ounces of gold and twenty rolls of brocade. And so
the quarrel was made up. But though Lu Bu’s body was with his adopted father
Dong Zhuo, his heart was with his promised bride Diao Chan.
Dong Zhuo having quite recovered went to court again, and Lu Bu followed him as
usual. One day, seeing Dong Zhuo deep in conversation with the Emperor, Lu Bu,
armed as he was, went out of the Palace and rode off to his chief’s
residence. He tied up his steed at the entrance and, halberd in hand, went to
the private apartment to seek his love. He found Diao Chan, and she told him to
go out into the garden where she would join him soon. He went, taking his
halberd with him, and he leaned against the rail of the Phoenix Pavilion to
wait for Diao Chan.
After a long time she appeared, swaying gracefully as she made her way under
the drooping willows and parting the flowers as she passed. She was exquisite,
a perfect fairy from the Palace of the Moon.
Tears were in her eyes as she came up and said, “Though I am not the
Minister’s real daughter, yet he treated me as his own child. The desire of
my life was fulfilled when he plighted me to you. But oh! to think of the
wickedness of the Prime Minister, stealing my poor self as he did. I suffered
so much. I longed to die, only that I had not told you the real truth. So I
lived on, bearing my shame as best as I could. Now that I have seen you, I can
end it all. My poor sullied body is no longer fit to serve a hero. I can die
before your eyes and so prove how true I am!”
Thus speaking she seized the curving rail and started into the lily pond. Lu Bu
caught her in his strong arms and wept as he held her close.
“I knew it: I always knew your heart!” he sobbed. “Only we never had a
chance to speak.”
She threw her arms about Lu Bu.
“If I cannot be your wife in this life, I will in the ages to come,” she
whispered.
“If I do not marry you in this life, I am no hero,” said he.
“Every day is a year long. O pity me! Rescue me! My lord!”
“I have only stolen away for a brief moment, and I am afraid that old rebel
will suspect something, so I must not stay too long,” said Lu Bu.
Diao Chan clung to his robe, saying, “If you fear the old thief so much, I
shall never see another sunrise!”
Lu Bu stopped.
“Give me a little time to think,” said he.
And he picked up his halberd to go.
“In the deep seclusion of the harem, I heard the stories of your prowess. You
were the one man who excelled all others. Little did I think that you of all
heroes would rest content under the dominion of another.”
And tears rained again!
A wave of shame flooded his face. Leaning his halberd against the railing, he
turned and clasped the girl to his breast, soothing her with fond words. The
lovers held each other close, swaying to and fro with emotion. They could not
bring themselves to say farewell.
In the meantime Dong Zhuo missed his henchman, and doubt filled his heart.
Hastily taking leave of the Emperor, he mounted his chariot and returned to his
palace. There at the gate stood Lu Bu’s well known steed Red Hare, riderless.
Dong Zhuo questioned the doorkeepers, and they told him the general was within.
He sent away his attendants and went alone to the private apartments. Lu Bu was
not there. He called Diao Chan, but there was no reply. He asked where she was,
and the waiting maids told him she was in the garden among the flowers.
So Dong Zhuo went into the garden, and there he saw the lovers in the pavilion
in most tender talk. Lu Bu’s trident halberd was leaning on the railing
beside him.
A howl of rage escaped Dong Zhuo and startled the lovers. Lu Bu turned, saw who
it was, and ran away. Dong Zhuo caught up the halberd and ran in pursuit. But
Lu Bu was fleet of foot while his master was very stout. Seeing no hope of
catching the runaway, Dong Zhuo hurled the halberd. Lu Bu fended it off and it
fell to the ground. Dong Zhuo picked it up and ran on. But by this time Lu Bu
was far ahead. Just as Dong Zhuo was running out at the garden gate, he dashed
full tilt against another man running in, and down he went.
Surged up his wrath within him as the billows heavenward leap.
Crashed his unwieldy body to earth in a shapeless heap.
We shall presently see who the other runner was.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 9 ****
The person who collided with the irate Dong Zhuo was his most trusty adviser Li
Ru. Li Ru had not fallen in spite of the shock and at once scrambled to help
Dong Zhuo to regain his feet and led him inside to the library, where they sat
down.
“What were you coming about?” said Dong Zhuo.
“Happening to be passing your gates, I heard that you had gone into your
private garden to look for your adopted son. Then came Lu Bu running and crying
out that you wanted to kill him, and I was coming in as fast as I could to
intercede for him when I accidentally collided with you. I am very sorry! I
deserve death.”
“The wretch! How could I bear to see him toying with my fair one? I will be
the death of his yet!”
“Your Graciousness is making a mistake. It is the ‘plucked tassel’ story
over again. But if you remember the banquet of old time where all guests were
to tear the tassels of their hats. In that banquet, King Zhuang of Chu made no
fuss about the liberties taken with his queen, although the hat-tassel in her
hand betrayed the culprit Jiang Xiong. His restraint stood him good stead, for
the same Jiang Xiong saved his life when he was hemmed in by the soldiers of
Qin. After all Diao Chan is only a handmaid, but Lu Bu is your trustiest friend
and most dreaded commander. If you took this chance of making the girl over to
him, your kindness would win his undying gratitude. I beg you, Sir, to think
over it well.”
Dong Zhuo hesitated a long time. He sat murmuring to himself. Presently he
said, “What you say is right. I must think over it.”
Li Ru felt satisfied. He took leave of his master and went away. Dong Zhuo went
to his private rooms and called Diao Chan.
“What were you doing there with Lu Bu?” said he.
She began to weep, saying, “Thy handmaid was in the garden among the flowers,
when he rushed in on me. I was frightened and ran away. He asked why I ran away
from a son of the family and pursued me right to the Phoenix Pavilion, where
you saw us. He had that halberd in his hand all the time. I felt he was a
vicious man and would force me to his will, so I tried to throw myself into the
lily pond, but he caught me in his arms and held me so that I was helpless.
Luckily just at that moment you came and saved my life!”
“Suppose I send you to him,” said Dong Zhuo.
Stunned, she wailed profusely, “What have thy handmaid done? My honor of
serving Your Highness could not bear to be given to a mere underling! Never! I
would rather die!”
And with this she snatched down a dagger hanging on the wall to kill herself.
Dong Zhuo plucked it from her hand and, throwing his arms about her, and cried,
“I was only joking!”
She lay back on his breast hiding her face and sobbing bitterly.
“This is the doing of that Li Ru,” said she. “He is much too thick with
Lu Bu. He suggested that, I know. Little he cares for the Imperial Rector’s
reputation or my life. Oh! I could eat him alive!”
“Do you think I could bear to lose you?” said Dong Zhuo.
“Though you love me yet I must not stay here. That Lu Bu will try to ruin me
if I do. I fear him!”
“We will go to Meiwo tomorrow, you and I, and we will be happy together and
have no cares.”
She dried her tears and thanked him. Next day Li Ru came again to persuade Dong
Zhuo to send the damsel to Lu Bu.
“This is a propitious day,” said Li Ru.
“He and I standing in the relation of father and son. I cannot very well do
that,” said Dong Zhuo. “But I will say no more about his fault. You may
tell him so and soothe him as well as you can.”
“You are not being beguiled by the woman, are you?” said Li Ru.
Dong Zhuo colored, saying, “Would you like to give your wife to some body
else? Do not talk about this any further. It would be better not to!”
Li Ru left the chamber. When he got outside, he cast his eyes up to heaven,
saying, “We are dead people —-slain by the hand of this girl!”
When a scholar of history reached this episode he wrote a verse or two:
Just introduce a woman,
Conspiracies succeed;
Of soldiers, or their weapons,
There really is no need.
They fought their bloody battles,
And doughty deeds were done;
But in a garden summer house
The victory was won.
The order was given to journey to Meiwo, and the whole body of officers
assembled to add luster to the start. Diao Chan, from her carriage, saw Lu Bu
among the crowd. She at once dropped her eyes and assumed an appearance of
deepest melancholy. After the cavalcade started and when her carriage had
almost disappeared in the distance, the disappointed lover reined in his steed
on a mount whence he could watch the dust that rose around it. Unutterable
sadness filled his heart.
Suddenly a voice said, “Why do you not accompany the Prime Minister, General,
instead of standing here and sighing?”
It was Wang Yun.
“I have been confined to the house by illness these few days,” continued
he, “so I have not seen you. But I had to struggle out today to see the Prime
Minister set off. This meeting is most fortunate. But why were you sighing?”
“Just on account of that daughter of yours,” said Lu Bu.
Feigning great astonishment, Wang Yun said, “So long a time and yet not given
to you!”
“The old ruffian has fallen in love with her himself!”
“Surely this cannot be true.”
Lu Bu related the whole story while Wang Yun listened, silent, but stamping on
the ground as with irritation and perplexity.
After a long time Wang Yun said, “I did not think he was such a beast!”
Taking Lu Bu by the hand, Wang Yun said, “Come to my house, and we will talk
it over.”
So they went away together to the house and retired to a secret room. After
some refreshments, Lu Bu told the whole story of the episode in Phoenix
Pavilion just as it happened.
Wang Yun said, “He seems to have corrupted my little girl and has stolen your
wife. He will be an object of shame and ridicule to the whole world. And those
who do not laugh at him will laugh at you and me. Alas! I am old and powerless
and can do nothing. More pitied than blamed! But you, General, you are a
warrior, the greatest hero in the world. Yet you have been put to this shame
and exposed to this contempt!”
A wave of fierce wrath rolled up in Lu Bu. Banging the table he shouted and
roared.
His host ostentatiously tried to calm him, saying, “I forgot myself. I should
not have spoken like that. Do not be so angry, I pray!”
“I will kill the wretch, I swear it! In no other way can I wash away my
shame.”
“No, no! Do not say such a thing,” said Wang Yun, putting his hand over the
other’s mouth. “You will bring trouble on poor me and my family!”
“When one is born great, one cannot be patient for long under another
person’s domination!” said Lu Bu.
“It needs someone greater than the Prime Minister to limit the scope of such
talents as yours.”
Lu Bu said, “I would not mind killing the old wretch were it not for the
relation in which we stand. I fear to provoke the hostile criticism of
posterity.”
Wang Yun shook his head, saying, “Your name is Lu Bu; his is Dong Zhuo. Where
was the paternal feeling when he threw the halberd at you?”
“I would have been misled, had you not said that!” said Lu Bu hotly.
Wang Yun saw the effect of his words and continued, “It would be a loyal deed
to restore the House of Han, and history would hand down your name to posterity
perpetually fragrant. If you lend your aid to Dong Zhuo, you will be a traitor
and your name will be tainted through all ages.”
Lu Bu rose from his place and bowed to Wang Yun.
“I have decided,” said he. “You need not fear, Sir.”
“But yet you may fail and bring upon yourself misfortune,” said Wang Yun.
Lu Bu drew his dagger, pricking his arm, and swearing by the blood that flowed.
Wang Yun fell on his knees and thanked him.
“Then the Han sacrifices will not be cut off, and you will be their savior.
But this must remain a secret, and I will tell you how the plot shall be worked
out.”
Lu Bu took leave with great emotion.
Wang Yun took into his confidence two colleagues, Court Administrator Shisun
Rui and Imperial Commander Huang Wan.
Shisun Rui said, “The moment is favorable. The Emperor has just recovered
from his illness, and we can dispatch an able talker to Meiwo to persuade Dong
Zhuo to come here to discuss affairs. Meanwhile we will obtain a secret decree
as authority for Lu Bu to lay an ambush just inside the Palace gates to kill
Dong Zhuo as he enters. This is the best plan to adopt.”
“But who would dare to go?” said Huang Wan.
“Li Su, General of the Imperial Tiger Army, would go. He belongs to the same
region as Lu Bu and is very angry with the Prime Minister for not advancing
him. His going would assure us the plan would be completed.”
“Good,” said Wang Yun. “Let us see what Lu Bu thinks of it.”
When Lu Bu was consulted, he told them that this Li Su’s persuasion had led
him to kill Ding Yuan, his former benefactor.
“If Li Su refuses this mission, I will kill him,” said Lu Bu.
So they sent for Li Su.
When Li Su arrived, Lu Bu said, “Formerly you talked me into killing Ding
Yuan and going over to Dong Zhuo. Now we find Dong Zhuo means evil for the
Emperor and is an oppressor of the people. His iniquities are many, and he is
hated by gods and humans. You go to Meiwo, say you have a command from the
Emperor to summon the Prime Minister to the Palace. He will come, and he will
be put to death. You will have the credit of being loyal and restoring the
Hans. Will you undertake this?”
“I also wish to slay him,” was the reply. “But I could not find anyone to
assist me. How can I hesitate? Your intervention is directly from Heaven!”
And Li Su snapped an arrow in twain as register of his oath.
“If this succeeds, what glorious rank will be yours!” said Wang Yun.
Next day Li Su, with a small escort, set out for Meiwo and announced himself as
bearer of a decree. He was conducted into Dong Zhuo’s presence. After he had
made his obeisance, Dong Zhuo asked what the decree was.
“His Majesty has recovered and wishes his ministers to meet him in the Palace
to consider the question of his abdication in your favor. That is what this
summons means.”
“What does Wang Yun think of the scheme?”
“Wang Yun has already begun the construction of the Terrace of Abdication and
only awaits my lord’s arrival.”
“Last night I dreamed a dragon coiled round my body,” said Dong Zhuo
greatly pleased, “and now I get this happy tidings! I must not neglect the
opportunity.”
So Dong Zhuo gave instructions to his four trusted generals for the safekeeping
of his city. Li Jue, Guo Si, Fan Chou, and Zhang Ji were to guard Meiwo with
three thousand troops of the Flying Bear Army. Then Dong Zhuo announced his
intention of starting on the morrow.
“When I am Emperor, you shall be Commander of Capital District,” said he.
“Your minister thanks you,” said Li Su.
Dong Zhuo went to bid farewell to his ninety-year-old mother.
“Whither are you going, my son?” asked she.
“I go to receive the abdication of Han; soon you will be the Empress
Dowager!”
“I have been feeling nervous and creepy these few days. It is a bad sign.”
“Anyone about to become the Mother of the State must have premonitions,”
said her son.
He left her with these words.
Just before starting, he said to Diao Chan, “When I am Emperor, you shall be
Lady of the Palace.”
She bowed low thanking him, but she knew and inwardly rejoiced.
Dong Zhuo went out, mounted his carriage, and began his journey to Capital
Changan with an imposing escort. Less than ten miles the wheel of his carriage
broke. He left it and mounted a horse. Another ten miles the horse snorted and
neighed, threw up his head and snapped the reins.
Dong Zhuo turned to Li Su and asked what these things portended.
“It means that you are going to receive the abdication of the Hans, which is
to renew all things: To mount the jeweled chariot and sit in the golden
saddle.”
And Dong Zhuo was pleased and convinced with this answer. During the second
day’s journey a violent gale sprang up, and the sky became covered with a
thick mist.
“What does this mean?” said Dong Zhuo.
The wily Li Su had an interpretation for this also, saying, “You are
ascending to the place of the dragon: There must be bright light and lurid
vapor to dignify your majestic approach.”
Dong Zhuo had no more doubts. He presently arrived and found many officials
waiting without the city gate to receive him, all but Li Ru who was ill and
unable to leave his chamber. He entered and proceeded to his own palace, where
Lu Bu came to congratulate him.
“When I sit on the throne, you shall command the whole armies of the empire,
horse and foot,” said Dong Zhuo.
That night Dong Zhuo slept in the midst of his escort. In the suburbs that
evening some children at play were singing a little ditty, and the words
drifted into the bedchamber on the wind.
“The grass in the meadow looks fresh now and green,
Yet wait but ten days, not a blade will be seen.”
The song sounded ominous, but Li Su was again prepared with a happy
interpretation: “It only means that the Lius are about to disappear, and the
Dongs to be exalted!”
Next morning at the first streak of dawn, Dong Zhuo prepared for his appearance
at court. On the way he saw a Daoist, dressed in a black robe and wearing a
white turban, who carried in his hand a tall staff with a long strip of white
cloth attached. At each end of the cloth was drawn a mouth.
“What is the meaning of this?” said Dong Zhuo.
“He is a madman,” said Li Su, and he told the guards to drive the fellow
away.
Dong Zhuo went in and found all the officials in court dress lining the road.
Li Su walked beside his carriage, a sword in his hand. When Li Su reached the
north gate of the Forbidden City, he found the soldiers of Dong Zhuo drawn up
outside and only the pushers of the Palace carriage, a twenty or so, were
allowed to proceed further.
When Dong Zhuo arrived near the Reception Hall, he saw that Wang Yun and all
the other officials standing at the door were armed.
“Why are they all armed?” said Dong Zhuo to Li Su.
Li Su was silent as he helped push the carriage forward swiftly to the
entrance.
Suddenly Wang Yun shouted, “The rebel is here! Where are the executioners?”
At this call sprang from both sides soldiers armed with halberds and spears who
attacked Dong Zhuo. But the breastplate he usually wore protected him, and
spears could not penetrate it.
He sank down in the carriage, wounded in the arms, calling loudly for his son,
“Where is Lu Bu?”
“Here, and with a decree to deal with a rebel!” said Lu Bu, as he appeared
in front of his “father”.
Thereupon he thrust his trident halberd through the victim’s throat. Then Li
Su hacked off the head and held it up.
Lu Bu, his left hand holding his halberd, thrust his right hand into his bosom
whence he drew the decree, crying, “The decree was to slay the rebel Dong
Zhuo —-no other!”
The whole assembly shouted, “Wan shui! Live forever! O Emperor!”
A sympathetic poet has written a few lines in pity:
Await the time, O noble, and be king,
Or failing, reap the solace riches bring;
Heaven never is partial, but severely just,
Meiwo stood strong, yet now it lies in dust.
The lust of blood awakened, Lu Bu urged further slaughter, crying, “Li Ru has
been the main initiator for Dong Zhuo in many crimes! Who shall go and kill
him?”
Li Su volunteered to go in search of him. But just then a shouting was heard at
the gates, and it was told them that a household servant had brought Li Ru in
bonds. Wang Yun ordered his immediate execution in the market place.
Dong Zhuo’s head was exposed in a crowded thoroughfare (AD 192). He was very
fat, and the guards made torches by sticking splints into the body, spilling
the corpse’s grease over the ground. The passers-by pelted the head and
spurned the body with their feet.
Wang Yun ordered a force of fifty thousand under Lu Bu, Huangfu Song, and Li Su
to destroy Meiwo. Learning the news of their master, Li Jue, Guo Si, Fan Chou,
and Zhang Ji fled west swiftly through the night with their Flying Bear Army to
Liangzhou Region.
When arriving Meiwo, Lu Bu’s first deed was to take Diao Chan into his
charge. Then they slew every member of the Dong family, sparing none, not even
Dong Zhuo’s aged mother. The heads of Dong Zhuo’s brother Dong Min and his
nephew Dong Huang were publicly displayed in the market place. In Meiwo were
hidden many young ladies of good families. These were set free. All properties
were confiscated. The wealth was enormous —-several hundred thousand ounces
of gold, millions of silver coins, pearls, gems, silks, velvets, furs, grain
stores.
When they returned to report success, Wang Yun rewarded and feasted the
soldiers. Banquets were held in the Ministry Hall to which all the officials
were invited. They drank and congratulated each other. While the feasting was
in progress it was announced that someone had come and was wailing over Dong
Zhuo’s corpse exposed in the market place.
“Dong Zhuo has been put to death,” said Wang Yun, angrily. “Every body is
glad to be rid of him, and yet one is found to lament over him. Who is this?”
So Wang Yun gave orders to arrest the mourner and bring him in. Soon he was
brought in, and when they saw him all were startled. For he was no other than
Court Counselor Cai Yong.
Wang Yun spoke to Cai Yong angrily, “Dong Zhuo has been put to death as a
rebel, and all the land rejoices. You, a Han minister, instead of rejoicing,
weep for him. Why?”
Cai Yong confessed his fault, saying, “I am without talent, yet know what is
right. I am not the man who turns my back on the dynasty and toward Dong Zhuo.
Yet once I experienced his kindness, and I could not help mourning for him. I
know my fault is grave, but I pray you regard the reasons. If you will leave my
head and only cut off my feet, you may use me to continue the History of Han,
whereby I may have the good fortune to be allowed to expiate my fault.”
All were sorry for Cai Yong, for he was a man of great talents, and they begged
that he might be spared.
The Imperial Guardian, Ma Midi, secretly interceded for him, saying, “Cai
Yong is famous as a scholar, and he can write glorious history, and it is
inadvisable to put to death a man renowned for rectitude without
consideration.”
But in vain, for the High Minister was now strong and obdurate.
Wang Yun said, “Centuries ago, Emperor Wu spared Sima Qian and employed him
on the annals, with the result that many slanderous stories have been handed
down to us. This is a trying period of great perplexity, and we dare not let a
specious fellow like this wield his pen in criticism of those about the court
of a youthful prince and abuse us as he will.”
Remonstrance and appeal being vain, Ma Midi retired.
But he said to his colleagues, “Is Wang Yun then careless of the future?
Worthy people are the mainstay of the state; laws are the canons of action. To
destroy the mainstay and nullify the laws is to hasten destruction!”
As was just said Wang Yun was obdurate. Cai Yong whose offense was an
expression of gratitude was thrown into prison and there strangled. The people
of that day wept for Cai Yong, for they refused to see any offense in what he
had done, and death was a harsh punishment.
Dong Zhuo, the dictator,
Tyrannized the state,
Fell and his sole mourner
Shared his direful fate.
Zhuge Liang in seclusion
Was content to dream,
Felt his worth and never
Helped a traitor’s scheme.
Those generals —-Li Jue, Guo Si, Fan Chou, and Zhang Ji —-whom Dong Zhuo
had left to guard Meiwo fled when their master was slain and went west into the
county of Shanxi in Liangzhou Region. Thence they sent in a memorial entreating
amnesty. But Wang Yun would not hear of it.
“Four of them were the chief instruments of Dong Zhuo’s aggressions. Now
though a general amnesty were proclaimed, these men should be excluded from its
benefit,” said Wang Yun.
The messenger returned and told the four there was no hope of pardon and they
could only flee.
Then their adviser, Jia Xu, said, “If we throw away our arms and flee singly,
then we shall fall easy victims to any village magistrate who may seize us.
Rather let us cajole the people of Shanxi to throw in their lot with us and
make a sudden onslaught on the capital and so avenge Dong Zhuo. If we succeed,
we control the court and the empire. There will be enough time to run away if
we fail.”
The plan was adopted, and they spread abroad the story that Wang Yun intended
to massacre the region.
Having thus thrown the people into a state of terror, they went a step farther
and said, “There is no advantage in dying for nothing. Revolt and join us!”
So they cajoled the people into joining them and gathered a host equal to one
hundred thousand. This horde was divided into four parts, and they all set out
to raid Capital Changan. On the way they fell in with a son-in-law of their
late chief, Imperial Commander Niu Fu, who marched five thousand troops from
Xiliang. Niu Fu had set out to avenge his father-in-law, and he became the Van
Leader of the horde.
As the Liangzhou troops advanced, the news came to Wang Yun, and he consulted
Lu Bu.
“They are a lot of rats!” said Lu Bu. “Never mind how many there are of
them. Be not in the least anxious!”
So Lu Bu and Li Su went to oppose them. The latter was in advance and met Niu
Fu. They fought. Niu Fu was outmatched and retired after suffering a slaughter.
But unexpectedly Niu Fu returned in a night attack, found Li Su quite
unprepared and drove Li Su’s force some ten miles, slaying many.
Li Su reported the defeat, and Lu Bu raged at him, saying, “You have sullied
my reputation as a warrior and destroyed our fighting spirit!”
And Lu Bu put Li Su to death, exposing his head at the camp gate.
Next day Lu Bu advanced his own force and engaged Niu Fu. He overwhelmed Niu Fu
and drove him off. That night Niu Fu called in his most trusted man, Hu Chier,
to advise him.
Hu Chier said, “Lu Bu is too doughty a fighter for us to hope to overcome
him. Our case is hopeless. Our best course is to desert these four generals,
secrete their valuables, and leave the army with just a few of our
followers.”
The plan of Hu Chier was adopted, and the two traitors and some others that
very night packed up and made their way out of camp. They were only half a
dozen. They came to a river and, while crossing, Hu Chier, tempted by the lust
of wealth, slew his companion. Then he went to offer the head of Niu Fu to Lu
Bu. Lu Bu inquired into the matter, and when a follower told him the truth, he
put the double traitor Hu Chier to death.
Then Lu Bu advanced against the rebels and fell in with Li Jue’s force.
Without giving them time to form in battle, Lu Bu attacked. Horses curvetting
and spears set, the army dashed in irresistibly, and Li Jue, making no stand,
fell back a long way. Li Jue took up a position under a hill fifteen miles away
and thence sent to call his fellows to council.
Li Jue said, “Lu Bu though brave in battle is no strategist and so not really
formidable. I will lead my troops to hold the mouth of the gorge, and every day
I will incite him to attack; and when he comes toward me, General Guo Si can
smite his rear, after the manner of Peng Yue when he fought against Chu. While
thus I am alternating attack and retreat, Generals Fan Chou and Zhang Ji will
march off in different directions toward Changan. Such an attack at two points
must end both Wang Yun and Lu Bu.”
They set themselves to carry out this scheme. As soon as Lu Bu reached the
hills, a force of Li Jue came out to attack him. Lu Bu made an angry dash
toward the enemy who retired up the hills, whence they shot arrows and hurled
stones like rain. Lu Bu’s troops halted. At this moment the report came that
the rear was being attacked and there appeared Guo Si. At once Lu Bu wheeled
toward the new enemy, but immediately the rolling drums gave the signal to
retire, and Lu Bu could not come to blows with them. As he called in his army,
the gongs clanged on the other side and his former opponent Li Jue came to
attack his front. But before Lu Bu could join battle, his rear was again
assaulted by Guo Si, who in his turn drew off immediately.
Thus Lu Bu was baited till his bosom was near bursting with rage. The same
tactics continued for several days. He could neither strike his enemies nor
escape them. His troops had no rest.
In the midst of these distracting maneuver, a messenger rode up in hot haste to
report: “The capital is in imminent danger from a double attack of Fan Chou
and Zhang Ji!”
Lu Bu at once ordered a march to save the capital, which became a rout when
both his opponents Li Jue and Guo Si came in pursuit. His loss was heavy.
He soon reached Changan and found the rebels there in enormous numbers and the
city quite surrounded. Lu Bu’s attack had but little effect, and as his
temper became more savage under defeat, many of his soldiers went over to the
rebels. He fell into deep melancholy.
Then a remnant of Dong Zhuo’s adherents still in the city, led by Li Meng and
Wang Fang, began to lend aid to the attackers; and a few days later they
secretly opened the city gate and the besiegers poured in. Lu Bu exerted
himself to the utmost but could not stem the tide. At the head of some hundred
horse, he dashed over to the Black Lock Gate and called out to Wang Yun, who
was on the other side.
“The case is desperate now. Ride with me to a place of safety!”
Wang Yun replied, “If I am gifted with the spirit of the state, I shall
succeed in restoring the tranquillity which I desire. But if I have it not,
then I offer my body as a sacrifice. I will not quail before dangers. Send my
thanks to the noble supporters beyond the Pass for their efforts, and bid them
remember their country!”
Lu Bu urged Wang Yun again and again, but Wang Yun would not leave. Soon flames
started up all over the city, and Lu Bu had to leave, abandoning his family to
their fate. He fled to seek refuge with Yuan Shu.
Li Jue, Guo Si, and his fellow leaders gave full license to their ruffians, who
robbed and murdered their fill. Many high officers perished. Ministers Chong
Fu, Lu Kui, and Zhou Huan, Imperial Commanders Cui Lie and Wang Qin all died in
the fighting.
In time the rebels penetrated to the inner part of the Palace, and the
courtiers begged the Emperor to proceed to the Gate of Pervading Peace to try
to quell the rioting.
At sight of the yellow umbrella, Li Jue and Fan Chou checked their armies, and
they all shouted, “Wan shui! Long life! O Emperor!”
The Emperor stood by the tower and addressed them, “Nobles, what means it
that you enter the capital in this unruly manner and without my summons?”
The two leaders looked up and said, “Dong Zhuo, Your Majesty’s Prime
Minister, has been slain by Wang Yun, and we are here to avenge him. We are no
rebels, Sire. Let us only have Wang Yun, and we draw off our troops.”
Wang Yun was actually among the courtiers and at the Emperor’s side.
Hearing this demand, Wang Yun said, “The plan was made for the benefit of the
Throne. But as this evil has grown therefrom, Your Majesty will not grudge
losing me. I have brought about evil, and I will go down to these rebels.”
The Emperor was torn with sorrow and wavered. But the faithful minister leaped
from the wall, crying, “Wang Yun is here!”
The two leaders drew their swords, crying, “For what crime was our master
slain?”
“His crimes filled the heavens and covered the earth: No tongue can tell
them. The day he died was a day of rejoicing in the whole city as you well
know,” said Wang Yun.
“And if he was guilty of some crime, what had we done not to be forgiven?”
“Seditious rebels, why bandy words? I am ready to die.”
And Wang Yun was slain at the foot of the tower.
Moved by the people’s sufferings,
Vexed at his prince’s grief,
Wang Yun compassed the traitor’s death,
That they might find relief.
Everyone knows him a hero,
Leal to the state always:
Living he guarded the princely towers,
His soul keeps guard today.
Having done the loyal minister to death at the Emperor’s feet, they proceeded
to exterminate also his whole family. Everyone mourned.
Then said the ruffians to each other, “Having gone so far, what could be
better than to make away with the Emperor and complete our scheme?”
The traitor condoned his crime,
Rebellion ought to cease;
But his licentious followers
Disturb the empire’s peace.
The fate of the Emperor will be disclosed in the next chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 10 ****
In the last chapter the two arch rebels, Li Jue and Guo Si, proposed to murder
Emperor Xian, but their followers Zhang Ji and Fan Chou opposed this.
“No. The people will not approve of his death now. Restore him to power, and
get the leaguers inside Changan’s control. Remove his supporters, and then we
can compass his death. And the empire shall be in our hands.”
So they ceased the attack.
The Emperor again spoke from the tower, saying, “Why do you still remain? You
have slain Wang Yun: Now withdraw these soldiers.”
Then Li Jue and Guo Si replied, “Your servants desire rank rewards for their
good service to the dynasty.”
“And what ranks, Sirs?”
All four wrote their wishes and handed them up to the Emperor who had no choice
but to accede to the request, and they were created:
Li Jue was appointed General of the Flying Chariots, Lord of Chiyang, Commander
of Capital District, Court Administrator, and granted Military Insignia.
Guo Si was appointed General of the Rear Army, Lord of Meiyang, Court
Administrator, and granted Military Insignia.
Fan Chou was appointed General of the Right Army and Lord of Wanian.
Zhang Ji was appointed General of the Flying Cavalry and Lord of Pingyan.
Li Meng and Wang Fang, for opening the city gates, were appointed Imperial
Commanders.
After receiving ranks of nobility, Li Jue and Guo Si thanked the Emperor, and
went away to camp at Xunung, the suburb of Changan. Other rebel leaders also
were gratified with ranks. And once more the capital was free of troops.
Dong Zhuo’s followers, having so far succeeded, did not forget their late
leader. They sought his corpse for burial, but only a few fragments were
discoverable. Then they had sculptors engrave a statue of fragrant wood in his
likeness, laid that out in proper form, and instituted a noble’s sacrifices
and prayers. The remains were dressed in the robes of a prince, laid in a
princely coffin for burial. They selected Meiwo for his tomb and having found
an auspicious day conveyed the coffin thither.
But a terrific thunder storm came on at the time of inhumation, and the ground
was flooded. The coffin was rived asunder, and the poor remains knocked out by
thunders. A second time they buried the coffin, but a similar thing happened in
the night. And yet a third time in another place but the earth rejected the
remains. Meanwhile the thunder-fire had entirely consumed them. So it may be
said justly that Heaven was exceedingly angry with Dong Zhuo.
So now Li Jue and Guo Si wielded the real power of the scepter, and they were
hard upon the people. They also removed the attendants from the Palace and
replaced them by their own creatures, who maintained a most perfect watch over
every movement of the Emperor so that he was greatly hampered and embarrassed.
All appointments and demotions were made by the two rebels. For the sake of
popularity they especially summoned the veteran general Zhu Jun to court, made
him Court Administrator and associated him with the government.
One day came a report that the Governor of Xiliang, Ma Teng, and the Imperial
Protector of Bingzhou, Han Sui, with one hundred thousand troops, were rapidly
approaching the capital with the intention of attacking the rebels in the name
of the Emperor.
Now these leaders from the west had laid careful plans. Ma Teng and Han Sui had
sent trusty friends to the capital to find out who would support them. They had
conspired with three officials —-Court Counselors Ma Yu and Chong Shao, and
Imperial Commander Liu Fan —-to be their inside allies and plot against the
rebels. These three obtained from the Throne two secret edicts conferring the
ranks of Commander Who Conquers the West on Ma Teng and Commander Who Guards
the West on Han Sui. With these powers the two commanders joined forces and
began their march.
The four leaders of the party in power —-Li Jue, Guo Si, Fan Chou, and Zhang
Ji —-held a consultation with their generals as to how to meet the attack.
Adviser Jia Xu said, “Since the attackers are coming from a distance, our
plan is to fortify and wait till shortage of food shall work for us. In a
hundred days their supplies will be consumed, and they must retire. We can
pursue, and we shall capture them.”
Li Meng and Wang Fang rose and said, “This plan is bad. Give us ten thousand
troops, and we will put an end to both of them and offer their heads before
your ensign!”
“To fight forthwith means defeat,” said Jia Xu.
Li Meng and Wang Fang cried with one voice, “If we fail, we are willing to
lose our heads! But if we win, then your head is forfeit.”
Jia Xu then suggested to Li Jue and Guo Si, saying, “Seventy miles west of
the capital stand the Zhouzhi Hills. The passes are narrow and difficult. Send
Generals Zhang Ji and Fan Chou to occupy this point of vantage and fortify
themselves so that they may support Li Meng and Wang Fang.”
Li Jue and Guo Si accepted this advice. They told off fifteen thousand horse
and foot, and Li Meng and Wang Fang left in high spirit. They made a camp
ninety miles from Changan.
The force from the west arrived. Ma Teng and Han Sui led out their troops to
the attack. They found their opponents Li Meng and Wang Fang in battle array.
Ma Teng and Han Sui rode to the front side by side. Pointing to the rebel
leaders, the commanders abused them, crying, “Those are traitors! Who will
capture them?”
Hardly were the words spoken when there came out a youth general with a clear,
white complexion as jade, eyes like shooting stars, lithe of body and strong of
limb. He was armed with a long spear and bestrode an excellent steed. This
young leader was Ma Chao, son of Ma Teng, then seventeen years of age.
Though young he was a supreme valiance. Wang Fang, despising him on account of
his youth, galloped forth to fight him. Before they had exchanged many passes
Wang Fang was disabled and fell to a thrust of Ma Chao’s spear. The victor
turned to retire into the formation, but Li Meng rode after Ma Chao to avenge
his fallen colleague.
Ma Chao did not see Li Meng, but his father called out: “You are followed!”
Hardly had Ma Teng spoken when he saw that the pursuer was a prisoner seated on
his son’s steed. Now Ma Chao had known he was followed, but pretended not to
see, waiting till his enemy should have come close and lifted his spear to
strike. Then Ma Chao suddenly wheeled about. The spear thrust met only empty
air; and as the horses passed, Ma Chao’s powerful arm shot out and pulled Li
Meng from the saddle. Thus Li Meng and Wang Fang’s soldiers were left
leaderless and fled in all directions. The army of Ma Teng and Han Sui dashed
in pursuit, and a complete victory was scored. They pressed into one of the
passes and made a camp. Then they decapitated Li Meng and exposed his head.
When Li Jue and Guo Si heard that both the boastful generals had fallen under
the hand of one young leader, they knew that Jia Xu had given good advice and
was gifted with clear prescience. So they valued his plans the more highly and
decided to act on the defensive. They refused all challenges to combat.
Surely enough after a couple of months the supplies of the Xiliang force were
all exhausted and the leaders began to consider retreat.
Just at this juncture a household servant of Ma Yu’s family betrayed his
master and told of the conspiracy of the three court officials to assist the
attackers. The two chiefs Li Jue and Guo Si in revenge seized the three
conspirators —-Ma Yu, Chong Shao, and Liu Fan —-, with every member of
their households, and beheaded them in the market place. The heads of the three
were exposed at the front gate of the capital.
Being short of food and hearing of the destruction of their three adherents in
the city, the only course for Ma Teng and Han Sui was to retreat. At once Zhang
Ji went in pursuit of Ma Teng, and Fan Chou followed Han Sui. The retreating
army under Ma Teng was beaten, and only by Ma Chao’s desperate efforts were
the pursuers driven off.
Fan Chou pursued the other army. When he had come close, Han Sui rode boldly up
and addressed him, saying, “You and I, Sir, are fellow villagers. Why then
behave so unfriendly?”
Fan Chou replied, “I must obey the commands of my chief.”
“I am here for the service of the state. Why do you press me so hard?” said
Han Sui.
At this Fan Chou turned his horse, called in his troops, and left Han Sui in
peace. Unwittingly a nephew of Li Jue had been a witness of this scene; and
when he saw the enemy allowed to go free, he returned and told his uncle. Angry
that his enemy had escaped, Li Jue would have sent an army to wreak vengeance
on his general.
But his adviser Jia Xu again came in, saying, “The people are yet unsettled:
It is dangerous to provoke another war. Instead, invite Fan Chou to a banquet
and, while the feast was in progress, executing him for dereliction of duty.”
This seemed good to Li Jue, so the banquet was prepared. Zhang Ji and Fan Chou
accepted their invitations and went cheerfully.
Toward the latter part of the entertainment a sudden change came over their
host Li Jue, and he suddenly asked Fan Chou, “Why have you been intriguing
with Han Sui? You are turning traitor, eh?”
The unhappy guest was taken aback. Before he could frame his words to reply, he
saw the assassins rush out with swords and axes. In a moment all was over, and
Fan Chou’s head lay beneath the table.
Scared beyond measure, his fellow-guest Zhang Ji groveled on the floor.
“Fan Chou was a traitor,” said the host, raising Zhang Ji by the arm,
“and he has his deserts. You are my friend and need not fear.”
Li Jue gave Zhang Ji command of Fan Chou’s army with which Zhang Ji returned
to his headquarters garrison in Hongnong.
No one of the leaders among the leaguers dared attempt an attack on the party
newly risen from Dong Zhuo’s disaffection, while on the other hand Jia Xu
never ceased to urge his masters to exert themselves for the welfare of the
people and thus to tempt wise people to join them. And by these means the
government began to prosper, and the court to reassert its authority.
However, a new trouble arose in the shape of a resurgence of Yellow Scarves in
Qingzhou. They came, under numerous chieftains, in the number of hundreds of
thousand and plundered any place they reached.
Court Administrator Zhu Jun said he knew of one who could destroy this
sedition, and when asked who was the man he proposed, Zhu Jun said, “You want
to destroy this horde of rebels: You will fail unless you get the service of
Cao Cao.”
“And where is he?” asked Li Jue.
“He is Governor of Dongjun. He has a large army, and you have only to order
him to act. The rising will be broken.”
A messenger went post haste with a command for Cao Cao and Bao Xin, Lord of
Jibei, to act together in quelling the rebellion. As soon as Cao Cao received
the court command, he arranged with his colleagues first to attack the rebels
at Shouyang. Bao Xin made a dash right into their midst and inflicting damage
wherever he could, but he was killed in battlefield. Cao Cao pursued the rebels
as they fled to Jibei. Ten thousand surrendered. Then Cao Cao put his former
enemies in the van. When his army reached any place, many more surrendered and
joined him. After one hundred days, he had won over three hundred thousand
troops and more than one million ordinary folks.
Of these new adherents the strongest and boldest were made the Qingzhou Army,
and the others were sent home to their fields. In consequence of these
successes Cao Cao’s prestige and fame became very great and increased daily.
He reported his success to Capital Changan and was rewarded with the title of
General Who Guards the East.
Liu Dai then submitted; he and his officials sent to Dongjun and invited Cao
Cao to take over Yanzhou.
At his new headquarters, Cao Cao welcomed wise counselors and bold warriors,
and many gathered around him. Two clever persons, uncle and nephew, came at the
same time, both from Yingchuan, named Xun Yu and Xun You. The uncle had once
been in the service of Yuan Shao.
Cao Cao rejoiced when he had won the elder Xun to his side, saying, “Xun Yu
is my Zhang Liang!”
He made Xun Yu a Field Commander. The nephew Xun You was famed for his ability
and had been in the court service when it was in Luoyang, but he had abandoned
that career in the Inner Bureau and retired to his village. Cao Cao made him a
Military Instructor.
Xun Yu said to Cao Cao, “There is a certain wise person of Yanzhou somewhere,
but I do not know in whose service he is.”
“Who is he?”
“Cheng Yu. He belongs to the eastern part of Yanzhou.”
“Yes, I have heard of him,” said Cao Cao.
So a messenger was sent to his native place to inquire. Cheng Yu was away in
the hills engaged in study. Cao Cao sent the messenger to the hills, and Cheng
Yu came at the invitation.
“I shall prove unworthy of your recommendation,” said Cheng Yu to his
friend Xun Yu, “for I am rough and ignorant. But have you forgotten a fellow
villager of yours, Guo Jia? He is really able. Why not spread the net to catch
him?”
“I had nearly forgotten!” said Xun Yu suddenly.
So he told Cao Cao of this man, who was at once invited.
Guo Jia, discussing the world at large with Cao Cao, recommended Liu Ye from
Henan, who was a descendant of Liu Xiu the Founder of Latter Han. When Liu Ye
had arrived, he was the means of inviting two more: Man Chong from Shanyang and
Lu Qian from Wucheng, who were already known to Cao Cao by reputation. These
two brought to their new master’s notice the name of Mao Jie from Chenliu,
who also came and was given office. Then a famous leader, with his troop of
some hundreds, arrived to offer service. This was Yu Jin of Taishan, an expert
horseman and archer, and skilled beyond his fellows in every form of military
exercise. He was made an Army Inspector.
Then another day Xiahou Dun brought a fellow to present to Cao Cao.
“Who is he?” asked Cao Cao.
“He is from Chenliu and is named Dian Wei. He is the boldest of the bold, the
strongest of the strong. He was one of Zhang Miao’s people, but quarreled
with his tent companions and killed some dozens of them with his fists. Then he
fled to the mountains where I found him. I was out shooting and saw him follow
a tiger across a stream. I persuaded him to join my troop, and I recommend
him.”
“I see he is no ordinary man,” said Cao Cao. “He is fine and straight and
looks very powerful and bold.”
“He is! He killed a man once to avenge a friend and carried his head through
the whole market place. Hundreds saw him, but dared not come near. The weapon
he uses now is a couple of spears, each weighs a hundred and twenty pounds, and
he vaults into the saddle with these under his arm.”
Cao Cao bade the man give proof of his skill. So Dian Wei galloped to and fro
carrying the spears. Then he saw away among the tents a huge banner swaying
dangerously with the force of the wind and on the point of falling. A crowd of
soldiers were vainly struggling to keep it steady. Down he leaped, shouted to
the men to clear out and held the staff quite steady with one hand, keeping it
perfectly upright in spite of the strong wind.
“This is old E Lai again!” said Cao Cao.
He gave Dian Wei a post of Commander of the Headquarters Guards and besides
made Dian Wei presents of an embroidered robe he was wearing and a swift steed
with a handsome saddle.
Cao Cao encouraged able people to assist him, and he had advisers on the civil
side and valiant generals in the army. He became famous throughout the East of
the Passes.
Now Cao Cao’s father, Cao Song, was living at Langye, whither he had gone as
a hidden place free from the turmoil of the partisan struggles. Cao Cao wished
to be united with him. As a dutiful son, Cao Cao sent the Governor of Taishan,
Ying Shao, to escort his father to Yanzhou. Old Cao Song read the letter with
joy, and the family prepared to move. They were some forty in all, with a train
of a hundred servants and many carts.
Their road led through Xuzhou Region where the Imperial Protector, Tao Qian,
was a sincere and upright man who had long wished to get on good terms with Cao
Cao but, hitherto, had found no means of effecting a bond of union. Hearing
that Cao Cao’s family was passing through his region, Tao Qian went to
welcome them, treated them with great cordiality, feasting and entertaining
them for two days; and when they left, he escorted them to his boundary.
Further he sent with them General Zhang Kai with a special escort of five
hundred.
The whole party reached the county of Huafei. It was the end of summer, just
turning into autumn, and at this place they were stopped by a tremendous storm
of rain. The only shelter was an old temple and thither they went. The family
occupied the main rooms and the escort the two side wings. The men of the
escort were drenched, angry, and discontented.
Then Zhang Kai called some of his petty officers to a secret spot and said,
“We are old Yellow Scarves and only submitted to Tao Qian because there was
no other choice. We have never got much out of it. Now here is the Cao family
with no end of gear, and we can be rich very easily. We will make a sudden
onslaught tonight at the third watch and slay the whole lot. Then we shall have
plenty of treasure, and we will get away to the mountains.”
They all agreed. The storm continued into the night; and as Cao Song sat
waiting anxiously for signs of clearing, he suddenly heard a hubbub at the west
end of the temple. His brother, Cao De, drawing his sword, went out to see what
it was about, and Cao De was at once cut down. Cao Song seized one of the
concubines by the hand, rushed with her through the passage toward the back of
the temple so that they might escape. But the lady was stout and could not get
through the narrow doors, so the two hid in one of the small outhouses at the
side. However, they were seen and slain.
The unhappy Governor Ying Shao fled for his life to Yuan Shao. The murderers
fled into the South of River Huai with their plunder after having set fire to
the old temple.
Cao Cao, whom the ages praise,
Slew his hosts on his former flight;
Nemesis never turns aside,
Murdered too his family died.
Some of the escort escaped and took the evil tidings to Cao Cao. When he heard
it he fell to the earth with a great cry. They raised him.
With set teeth he muttered, “Tao Qian’s people have slain my father: No
longer can the same sky cover us! I will sweep Xuzhou off the face of the
earth. Only thus can I satisfy my vengeance.”
Cao Cao left one small army of thirty thousand under Xun Yu and Cheng Yu to
guard the east headquarters and the three counties of Juancheng, Fanxia, and
Dongjun. Then he set forth with all the remainder to destroy Xuzhou and avenge
his father. Xiahou Dun, Yu Jin, and Dian Wei were Van Leaders with Cao Cao’s
orders to slaughter all the inhabitants of each captured city.
Now the Governor of Jiujiang, Bian Rang, was a close friend of Tao Qian.
Hearing Xuzhou was threatened, Bian Rang set out with five thousand troops to
his friend’s aid. Angered by this move, Cao Cao sent Xiahou Dun to stop and
kill Bian Rang while still on the march.
At this time Chen Gong was in office in Dongjun, and he was also on friendly
terms with Tao Qian. Hearing of Cao Cao’s design to destroy the whole
population, Chen Gong came in haste to see his former companion. Cao Cao,
knowing Chen Gong’s errand, put him off at first and would not see him. But
then Cao Cao could not forget the kindness he had formerly received from Chen
Gong, and presently the visitor was called to his tent.
Chen Gong said, “They say you go to avenge your father’s death on Xuzhou,
to destroy its people. I have come to say a word. Imperial Protector Tao Qian
is humane and a good man. He is not looking out for his own advantage, careless
of the means and of others. Your worthy father met his unhappy death at the
hands of Zhang Kai. Tao Qian is guiltless. Still more innocent are the people,
and to slay them would be an evil. I pray you think over it.”
Cao Cao retorted angrily, “You once abandoned me, and now you have the
impudence to come to see me! Tao Qian slew my whole family, and I will tear his
heart out in revenge. I swear it! You may speak for your friend and say what
you will. I shall be as if I heard not.”
Intercession had failed. Chen Gong sighed and took his leave.
He said, “Alas! I cannot go to Tao Qian and look upon his face.”
So Chen Gong rode off to the county of Chenliu to give service to Governor
Zhang Miao.
Cao Cao’s army of revenge laid waste whatever place it passed through,
slaying the people and desecrating their cemeteries (AD 193).
When Tao Qian heard the terrible tidings, he looked up to heaven, saying, “I
must be guilty of some fault before Heaven to have brought this evil upon my
people!”
He called together his officials to consult.
One of them, Cao Bao, said, “Now the enemy is upon us: We cannot sit and
await death with folded hands. I for one will help you to make a fight.”
Tao Qian reluctantly sent the army out. From a distance he saw Cao Cao’s army
spread abroad like frost and rushed far and wide like snow. In their midst was
a large white flag and on both sides was written Vengeance.
When he had ranged his troops, Cao Cao rode out dressed in mourning white and
abused Tao Qian.
But Tao Qian advanced, and from beneath his ensign he bowed low and said, “I
wished to make friends with you, Illustrious Sir, and so I sent Zhang Kai to
escort your family. I knew not that his rebel heart was still unchanged. The
fault does not lie at my door as you must see.”
“You old wretch! You killed my father, and now you dare mumble this
nonsense!” said Cao Cao.
And he asked who would go out and seize Tao Qian.
Xiahou Dun undertook this service and rode out. Tao Qian fled to the inner
portion of his array; and as Xiahou Dun came on, Cao Bao went to meet him. But
just as the two horses met, a hurricane burst over the spot, and the flying
dust and pebbles threw both sides into the utmost confusion. Both drew off.
Tao Qian retired into the city and called his officers to council.
“The force against us is too strong,” said he. “I will give myself up as
a prisoner and let him wreak his vengeance on me. I may save the people.”
But a voice was heard saying, “You have long ruled here, and the people love
you. Strong as the enemy are, they are not necessarily able to break down our
walls, especially when defended by you and your people. I have a scheme to
suggest that I think will make Cao Cao die in a place where he will not find
burial.”
These bold words startled the assembly, and they eagerly asked what the scheme
was.
Making overtures for friendship, Tao Qian encountered deadly hate.
But, where danger seemed most threatening, he discovered safety’s gate.
The next chapter will disclose who the speaker was.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 11 ****
of a wealthy family of merchants in Donghai and trading in Luoyang. One day
traveling homeward from that city in a carriage, he met an exquisitely
beautiful lady trudging along the road, who asked him to let her ride. He
stopped and yielded his place to her. She invited him to share the seat with
her. He mounted, but sat rigidly upright, never even glancing in her direction.
They traveled thus for some miles when she thanked him and alighted.
Just as she left she said, “I am the Goddess of Fire from the Southern Land.
I am on my way to execute a decree of the Supreme God to burn your dwelling,
but your extreme courtesy has so deeply touched me that I now warn you. Hasten
homeward, remove your valuables, for I must arrive tonight.”
Thereupon she disappeared. Mi Zhu hastily finished his journey and, as soon as
he arrived, moved everything out of his house. Sure enough that night a fire
started in the kitchen and involved the whole house. After this he devoted his
wealth to relieving the poor and comforting the afflicted. Tao Qian gave him
the magistracy office he then held.
The plan Mi Zhu proposed was this: “I will go to Beihai and beg Governor Kong
Rong to help. Another should go to Qingzhou on a similar mission to get the
help from Imperial Protector Tian Kai. If the armies of these two places march
on Cao Cao, he will certainly retire.”
Tao Qian accepted the plan and wrote two letters. He asked for a volunteer to
go to Qingzhou, and a certain Chen Deng of Guangling offered himself and, after
he had left, Mi Zhu was formally entrusted with the mission to the north.
Meanwhile Tao Qian and his generals would hold the city as they could.
Kong Rong was a native of Qufu in the old state of Lu. He was one of the
twentieth generation in descent from the great Teacher Confucius (Kong Fuzi).
Kong Rong had been noted as a very intelligent lad, somewhat precocious. When
ten years old he had gone to see Li Ying, the Governor of Henan, but the
doorkeeper demurred to letting him in.
But when Kong Rong said, “I am Minister Li Ying’s intimate friend,” he
was admitted.
Li Ying asked Kong Rong what relations had existed between their families that
might justify the term intimate.
The boy replied, “Of old my ancestor Confucius questioned your ancestor, the
Daoist sage Laozi, concerning ceremonies. So our families have known each other
for many generations.”
Li Ying was astonished at the boy’s ready wit.
Presently High Minister Chen Wei visited, to whom Li Ying told the story of his
youthful guest. “He is a wonder, this boy,” said Li Ying, pointing to Kong
Rong.
Chen Wei replied, “It does not follow that a clever boy grows up into a
clever man.”
The lad took him up at once, saying, “By what you say, Sir, you were
certainly one of the clever boys.”
The Minister and the Governor all laughed, saying, “The boy is going to be a
noble vessel.”
Thus from boyhood Kong Rong was famous. As a man he rose to be an Imperial
Commander and was sent as Governor to Beihai, where he was renowned for
hospitality. He used to quote the lines:
“Let the rooms be full of friends,
And the cups be full of wine.
That is what I like.”
After six years at Beihai the people were devoted to him. The day that Mi Zhu
arrived, Kong Rong was, as usual, seated among his guests, and the messenger
was ushered in without delay. In reply to a question about the reason of the
visit, Mi Zhu presented Tao Qian’s letter which said that Cao Cao was
pressing on Xuzhou City and the Imperial Protector prayed for help.
Then said Kong Rong, “Your master and I are good friends, and your presence
here constrains me to go to his aid. However, I have no quarrel with Cao Cao
either, so I will first write to him to try to make peace. If he refuses my
offer, then I must set the army in motion.”
“Cao Cao will not listen to proposals of peace: He is too certain of his
strength,” said Mi Zhu.
Kong Rong wrote his letter and also gave orders to muster his troops. Just at
this moment happened another rising of the Yellow Scarves, ten thousand of
them, and the ruffians began to rob and murder at Beihai. It was necessary to
deal with them first, and Kong Rong led his army outside the city.
The rebel leader, Guan Hai, rode out to the front, saying, “I know this
county is fruitful and can well spare ten thousand carts of grain. Give me that
and we retire; refuse, and we will batter down the city walls and destroy every
soul!”
Kong Rong shouted back, “I am a servant of the great Hans, entrusted with the
safety of their land. Think you I will feed rebels?”
Guan Hai whipped his steed, whirled his sword around his head, and rode
forward. Zong Bao, one of Kong Rong’s generals, set his spear and rode out to
give battle, but after a very few bouts Zong Bao was cut down. Soon the
soldiers fell into panic and rushed pell-mell into the city for protection. The
rebels then laid siege to the city on all sides. Kong Rong was very down-
hearted; and Mi Zhu, who now saw no hope for the success of his mission, was
grieved beyond words.
The sight from the city wall was exceeding sad, for the rebels were there in
enormous numbers. One day standing on the wall, Kong Rong saw afar a man armed
with a spear riding hard in among the Yellow Scarves and scattering them before
him like chaff before the wind.
Before long the man had reached the foot of the wall and called out, “Open
the gate!”
But the defenders would not open to an unknown man, and in the delay a crowd of
rebels gathered round the rider along the edge of the moat. Suddenly wheeling
about, the warrior dashed in among them and bowled over a dozen at which the
others fell back. At this Kong Rong ordered the wardens to open the gates and
let the stranger enter. As soon as he was inside, he dismounted, laid aside his
spear, ascended the wall, and made humble obeisance to the Governor.
“My name is Taishi Ci, and I am from the county of Laihuang. I only returned
home yesterday from the north to see my mother, and then I heard that your city
was in danger from a rebel attack. My mother said you had been very kind to her
and told me I should try to help. So I set out all alone, and here I am.”
This was cheering. Kong Rong already knew Taishi Ci by reputation as a valiant
fighting man, although they two had never met. The son being far away from his
home, Kong Rong had taken his mother, who dwelt a few miles from the city,
under his especial protection and saw that she did not suffer from want. This
had won the old lady’s heart and she had sent her son to show her gratitude.
Kong Rong showed his appreciation by treating his guest with the greatest
respect, making him presents of clothing and armor, saddles and horses.
Presently said Taishi Ci, “Give me a thousand soldiers, and I will go out and
drive off these fellows.”
“You are a bold warrior, but they are very numerous. It is a serious matter
to go out among them,” said Kong Rong.
“My mother sent me because of your goodness to her. How shall I be able to
look her in the face if I do not raise the siege? I would prefer to conquer or
perish.”
“I have heard Liu Bei is one of the heroes in the world. If we could get his
help, there would be no doubt of the result. But there is no one to send.”
“I will go as soon as I have received your letter!”
So Kong Rong wrote letters and gave them to his helper.
Taishi Ci put on his armor, mounted his steed, attached his bow and quiver to
his girdle, took his spear in his hand, tied his packed haversack firmly to his
saddle bow, and rode out at the city gate. He went quite alone.
Along the moat a large party of the besiegers were gathered, and they came to
intercept the solitary rider. But Taishi Ci dashed in among them and cut down
several and so finally fought his way through.
Guan Hai, hearing that a rider had left the city, guessed what his errand would
be and followed Taishi Ci with a party of horsemen. Guan Hai spread them out so
that the messenger rider was entirely surrounded. Then Taishi Ci laid aside his
spear, took his bow, adjusted his arrows one by one and shot all round him. And
as a rider fell from his steed with every twang of Taishi Ci’s bowstring, the
pursuers dared not close in.
Thus he got clear away and rode in hot haste to Liu Bei. Taishi Ci reached
Pingyuan, and after greeting his host in proper form he told how Kong Rong was
surrounded and had sent him for help. Then he presented the letter which Liu
Bei read.
“And who are you?” asked Liu Bei.
“I am Taishi Ci, a fellow from Laihuang. I am not related by ties of kin to
Kong Rong, nor even by ties of neighborhood, but I am by the bonds of sentiment
and I share his sorrows and misfortunes. The Yellow Scarves have invested his
city, and he is distressed with none to turn to, and destruction is very near.
You are known as humane, righteous, and eager to help the distressed. Therefore
at his command I have braved all dangers and fought my way through his enemies
to pray you save him.”
Liu Bei smiled and sighed, saying, “And does he know there is a Liu Bei in
this world?”
So Liu Bei, together with Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, told off three thousand troops
and set out to help raise the siege. When the rebel leader Guan Hai saw these
new forces arriving, he led out his army to fight them, thinking he could
easily dispose of so small a force.
The brothers and Taishi Ci with them sat on their horses in the forefront of
their array. Guan Hai hastened forward. Taishi Ci was ready to fight, but Guan
Yu had opened the combat. He rode forth and the two steeds met. The soldiers
set up a great noise. After a few bouts Guan Yu’s green-dragon saber rose and
fell, and with the stroke fell the rebel leader.
This was the signal for Zhang Fei and Taishi Ci to take a share, and they
advanced side by side. With their spears ready they dashed in, and Liu Bei
urged forward his force. The besieged Governor saw his doughty rescuers laying
low the rebels as tigers among a flock of sheep. None could withstand them, and
he then sent out his own troops to join in the battle so that the rebels were
between two armies. The rebels’ force was completely broken and many troops
surrendered, while the remainder scattered in all directions.
The victors were welcomed into the city, and as soon as possible a banquet was
prepared in their honor. Mi Zhu was presented to Liu Bei. Mi Zhu related the
story of the murder of Cao Song by Zhang Kai, Cao Cao’s vengeful attack on
Xuzhou, and his coming to beg for assistance.
Liu Bei said, “Imperial Protector Tao Qian is a kindly man of high character,
and it is a pity that he should suffer this wrong for no fault of his own.”
“You are a scion of the imperial family,” said Governor Kong Rong, “and
this Cao Cao is injuring the people, a strong man abusing his strength. Why not
go with me to rescue the sufferers?”
“I dare not refuse, but my force is weak and I must act cautiously,” said
Liu Bei.
“Though my desire to help arises from an old friendship, yet it is a
righteous act as well. I do not think your heart is not inclined toward the
right,” said Kong Rong.
Liu Bei said, “This being so, you go first and give me time to see Gongsun
Zan from whom I may borrow more troops and horses. I will come anon.”
“You surely will not break your promise?” said the Governor.
“What manner of man think you that I am?” said Liu Bei. “The Sage said,
‘Death is common to all; the person without truth cannot maintain the
self.’ Whether I get the troops or not, certainly I shall come myself.”
So the plan was agreed to. Mi Zhu set out to return forthwith while Kong Rong
prepared for his expedition.
Taishi Ci took his leave, saying, “My mother bade me come to your aid, and
now happily you are safe. Letters have come from my fellow townsman, Liu Yao,
Imperial Protector of Yangzhou, calling me thither and I must go. I will see
you again.”
Kong Rong pressed rewards upon Taishi Ci, but he would accept nothing and
departed.
When his mother saw him, she was pleased at his success, saying, “I rejoice
that you have been able to prove your gratitude!”
After this he departed for Yangzhou.
Liu Bei went away to his friend Gongsun Zan and laid before Gongsun Zan his
design to help Xuzhou.
“Cao Cao and you are not enemies. Why do you spend yourself for the sake of
another?” said Gongsun Zan.
“I have promised,” Liu Bei replied, “and dare not break faith.”
“I will lend you two thousand horse and foot,” said Gongsun Zan.
“Also, I wish to have the services of Zhao Zilong,” said Liu Bei.
Gongsun Zan agreed to this also. They marched away, Liu Bei’s own troops
being in the front, and Zhao Zilong, with the borrowed troops, being in rear.
In due course Mi Zhu returned saying that Kong Rong had also obtained the
services of Liu Bei. The other messenger, Chen Deng, came back and reported
that Tian Kai would also bring help. Then was Tao Qian’s heart set at ease.
But both the leaders, though they had promised aid, greatly dreaded their
antagonist and camped among the hills at a great distance, fearful of coming
too close to Cao Cao’s quarters. Cao Cao knew of their coming and divided his
army into parts to meet them, so postponing the attack on the city itself.
Presently Liu Bei came up and went to see Kong Rong, who said, “The enemy is
very powerful, and Cao Cao handles his army skillfully. We must be cautious.
Let us make most careful observations before we strike a blow.”
“What I fear is famine in the city,” said Liu Bei. “They cannot hold out
very long. I will put my troops with yours under your command, while I with
Zhang Fei make a dash through to see Tao Qian and consult with him.”
Kong Rong approved of this, so he and Tian Kai took up positions on the ox-horn
formation, with Guan Yu and Zhao Zilong on either side to support them.
When Liu Bei and Zhang Fei leading one thousand troops made their dash to get
through Cao Cao’s army, they got as far as the flank of his camp when there
arose a great beating of drums, and horse and foot rolled out like billows on
the ocean. The leader was Yu Jin.
Yu Jin checked his steed and called out, “You mad men from somewhere, where
are you going?”
Zhang Fei heard Yu Jin but deigned no reply. He only rode straight to attack
the speaker. After they had fought a few bouts, Liu Bei waved his double swords
as signal for his troops to come on, and they drove Yu Jin before them. Zhang
Fei led the pursuit and in this way they reached the city wall.
From the city wall, the besieged saw a huge banner embroidered in white Liu Bei
of Pingyuan, and the Imperial Protector bade them open the gate for the
rescuers to enter. Liu Bei was made very welcome, conducted to the residency,
and a banquet prepared in his honor. The soldiers also were feasted.
Tao Qian was delighted with Liu Bei, admiring his high-spirited appearance and
clear speech. Tao Qian bade Mi Zhu offer Liu Bei the seal and insignia of the
protectorship office. But Liu Bei shrank back startled.
“What does this mean?” said Liu Bei.
Tao Qian said, “There is trouble on every side, and the kingly rule is no
longer maintained. You, Sir, are a member of the family and eminently fitted to
support them and their prerogatives. I am verging on senility, and I wish to
retire in your favor. I pray you not to decline, and I will report my action to
the court.”
Liu Bei started up from his seat and bowed before his host, saying, “Scion of
the family I may be, but my merit is small and my virtue meager. I doubt my
fitness even for my present post, and only a feeling of doing right sent me to
your assistance. To hear such speech makes me doubt. Surely you think I came
with greed in my heart. May God help me no more if I cherished such a
thought!”
“It is a poor old man’s real sentiment,” said Tao Qian.
Time after time Tao Qian renewed his offer to entrust the region of Xuzhou to
Liu Bei, but Liu Bei kept refusing.
In the midst of this came Mi Zhu, saying, “The enemies had reached the wall,
and something must be done to drive them off. The present matter could await a
more tranquil time.”
Said Liu Bei, “I ought to write to Cao Cao to press him to raise the siege.
If he refuses, we will attack forthwith.”
Orders were sent to the camps outside to remain quiescent till the letter could
reach Cao Cao.
It happened that Cao Cao was holding a council when a messenger with a war
letter was announced. The letter was brought in and handed to him and, when he
had opened and looked at it, he found it was from Liu Bei.
This is the letter, very nearly:
“Since meeting you outside the pass, fate has assigned us to different
quarters of the world, and I have not been able to pay my respects to you.
Touching the death of your noble father, it was owing to the vicious nature of
Zhang Kai and due to no fault of Tao Qian. Now while the remnant of the Yellow
Scarves is disturbing the lands, and Dong Zhuo’s partisans have the upper
hand in the capital, I wish that you, Illustrious Sir, would regard the
critical position of the court rather than your personal grievances, and so
divert your forces from the attack on Xuzhou to the rescue of the state. Such
would be for the happiness of this city and the whole empire.”
Cao Cao gave vent to a torrent of abuse: “Who is this Liu Bei that he dares
write and exhort me? Beside, he means to be satirical.”
Cao Cao issued orders to put the bearer of the letter to death and to press on
the siege.
But Guo Jia remonstrated, saying, “Liu Bei has come from afar to help Tao
Qian, and he is trying the effect of politeness before resorting to arms. I
pray you, my lord, reply with fair words that his heart may be lulled with a
feeling of safety. Then attack with vigor and the city will fall.”
Cao Cao found this advice good, so he spared the messenger, telling him to wait
to carry back his reply.
While this was going on, a horseman came with news of misfortune: “Lu Bu has
invaded Yanzhou, now holding Puyang. The three counties left —-Juancheng,
Fanxia, and Dongjun —-are under severe attacks!”
When Li Jue and Guo Si, the two partisans of Dong Zhuo, succeeded in their
attack on the capital, Lu Bu had fled to Yuan Shu. However, Yuan Shu looked
askance at him for his instability and refused to receive him. Then Lu Bu went
to try Yuan Shao, who was a brother of Yuan Shu. Yuan Shao accepted the warrior
and made use of him in an attack upon Zhang Yan in Changshan. But Lu Bu’s
success filled him with pride, and his arrogant demeanor so annoyed the other
commanders that Yuan Shao was on the point of putting him to death. To escape
this Lu Bu had gone away to Zhang Yang, Governor of Shangdang, who accepted his
services.
About this time Pang Shu, who had been hiding and protecting Lu Bu’s family
in Changan since his disappearance, restored them to him. This deed angered Li
Jue and Guo Si so that they put Pang Shu to death and wrote to Lu Bu’s
protector to serve him the same. To escape this Lu Bu once again had to flee
and this time joined himself to Zhang Miao, the Governor of Chenliu.
Lu Bu arrived just as Zhang Miao’s brother, Zhang Chao, was introducing Chen
Gong.
Chen Gong said to Zhang Miao, “The rupture of the empire has begun, and
warlords are seizing what they can. It is strange that you, with all the
advantages of population and provisions you enjoy, do not strike for
independence. Cao Cao has gone on an expedition against the east, leaving his
own territory defenseless. Lu Bu is one of the warriors of the day. If you and
he together attacked and got Yanzhou, you could then proceed to the
dominion.”
Zhang Miao was pleased and resolved to try. He ordered an attack, and soon Lu
Bu was in possession of Yanzhou and its neighborhood, all but three small
counties of Juancheng, Fanxia, and Dongjun, which were vigorously and
desperately defended by Xun Yu and Cheng Yu in concert. Cao Cao’s cousin, Cao
Ren, had fought many battles but was repeatedly defeated, and the messenger
with the evil tidings had come from him asking prompt help.
Cao Cao was greatly disturbed by this and said, “If my own region be lost, I
have no home to return to! I must do something at once.”
“The best thing would be to become friends with Liu Bei at any cost and
return to Yanzhou,” said Guo Jia.
Then Cao Cao wrote to Liu Bei, gave the letter to the waiting messenger and
broke camp. The news that the enemy had left was very gratifying to Tao Qian,
who then invited his various defenders into Xuzhou City and prepared banquets
and feasts in token of his gratitude.
At one of these, when the feasting was over, he proceeded with his wish of
retirement in favor of Liu Bei.
Placing Liu Bei in the seat of highest honor, Tao Qian bowed before him and
then addressed the assembly, “I am old and feeble, and my two sons lack the
ability to hold so important an office as this. The noble Liu Bei is a
descendant of the imperial house. He is of lofty virtue and great talent. Let
him then take over the rule of this region, and only too willingly I shall
retire to have leisure to nurse my health.”
Liu Bei replied, “I came at the request of Governor Kong Rong, because it was
the right thing to do. Xuzhou is saved; but if I take it, surely the world will
say I am a wicked man.”
Mi Zhu said, “You may not refuse. The House of Han is falling, their realm is
crumbling, and now is the time for doughty deeds and signal services. This is a
fertile region, well populated and rich, and you are the man to rule over
it.”
“But I cannot accept,” said Liu Bei.
“Imperial Protector Tao Qian is a great sufferer,” said Chen Deng, “and
cannot see to matters. You may not decline, Sir.”
Said Liu Bei, “Yuan Shu belongs to a family of rulers, who have held the
highest offices of state four times in three generations. The multitude people
respects him. Why not invite him to this task?”
“Because Yuan Shu is a drying skeleton in a dark tomb: Not worth talking
about. This opportunity is a gift from Heaven, and you will never cease to
regret its loss,” said Kong Rong.
So spoke Kong Rong, but still Liu Bei obstinately refused.
Tao Qian besought him with tears, saying, “I shall die if you leave me, and
there will be none to close my eyes.”
“Brother, you should accept the offer thus made,” said Guan Yu.
“Why so much fuss?” said Zhang Fei. “We have not taken the place. It is
he who wishes to give it to you.”
“You all persuade me to do what is wrong,” said Liu Bei.
Seeing he could not persuade Liu Bei, Tao Qian then said, “As you are set in
determination, perhaps you will consent to encamp at Xiaopei. It is only a
little town, but thence you can keep watch and ward over the region.”
They all with one voice prayed Liu Bei to consent, so he gave in. The feast of
victory being now ended, the time came to say farewell. When Zhao Zilong took
his leave, Liu Bei held his hands alternately while dashing away the falling
tears. Kong Rong and Tian Kai went home to their own places.
When Liu Bei and his brothers took up their abode in Xiaopei, they first
repaired the defenses, and then they put out proclamations in order to calm the
inhabitants.
In the meantime Cao Cao had marched toward his own region (AD 194).
Cao Ren met and told him, “Lu Bu is very powerful, and he has Chen Gong as
Adviser. Yanzhou is as good as lost, with the exception of three counties which
Xun Yu and Cheng Yu are vigorously defending together.”
Cao Cao said, “I own that Lu Bu is a bold fighter but nothing more: He has no
craft. So we need not fear him seriously.”
Then he gave orders to make a strong camp till they could think out some
victorious plan.
Lu Bu, knowing of Cao Cao’s return, called two of his subordinate generals,
Xue Lan and Li Fang, to him and assigned to them the task of holding the city
of Yanzhou, saying, “I have long waited for opportunity to employ your skill.
Now I give you ten thousand soldiers, and you are to hold the city while I go
forth to attack Cao Cao.”
They accepted.
But Chen Gong, the strategist, came in hastily, saying, “General, you are
going away. Whither?”
“I am going to camp my troops at Puyang, to establish an ox-horn vantage.”
“You are making a mistake,” said Chen Gong. “The two you have chosen to
defend this city are unequal to the task. For this expedition remember that
about sixty miles due south, on the treacherous road to the Taishan Mountains,
is a very advantageous position where you should place your best men in ambush.
Cao Cao will hasten homeward by double marches when he hears what has happened.
If you strike when half his troops have gone past this point, you may seize
him.”
Said Lu Bu, “I am going to occupy Puyang and see what develops. How can you
guess my big plan?”
So Lu Bu left Xue Lan in command at Yanzhou and went away.
Now when Cao Cao approached the dangerous part of the road near the Taishan
Mountains, Guo Jia warned him, saying, “Do not advance hastily, my lord.
There is doubtless an ambush.”
But Cao Cao laughed, saying, “We know all Lu Bu’s dispositions. Xue Lan is
keeping the city, while Lu Bu is massing his troops at Puyang. Do you think Lu
Bu has laid an ambush? I shall tell Cao Ren to besiege Yanzhou, and I shall go
to Puyang.”
In Puyang, when Chen Gong heard of the enemy’s approach, he spoke, saying,
“The enemy will be fatigued with long marches, so attack quickly before they
have time to recover.”
Lu Bu replied, “I, a single horseman, am afraid of none. I come and go as I
will. Think you I fear this Cao Cao? Let him settle his camp; I will take him
after that.”
Now Cao Cao neared Puyang, and he made a camp. The next day he led out his
commanders, and they arrayed their armies in open country. Cao Cao took up his
station on horseback between the two standards, watching while his opponents
arrived and formed up in a circular area.
Lu Bu was in front, followed by eight of his generals, all strong men: Zhang
Liao of Mayi, backed by Hao Meng, Cao Xing, and Cheng Lian; Zang Ba of Huaying,
backed by Wei Xu, Song Xian, and Hou Cheng. They led an army of fifty thousand
in total.
The drums began their thunderous roll, and Cao Cao, pointing to his opponent,
said, “You and I had no quarrel, why then did you invade my land?”
“The cities of Han are the possession of all. What is your special claim?”
said Lu Bu.
So saying, Lu Bu ordered Zang Ba to ride forth and challenge. From Cao Cao’s
side the challenge was accepted by Yue Jing. The two steeds approached each
other; two spears were lifted both together, and they exchanged near thirty
blows with no advantage to either. Then Xiahou Dun rode out to help his
colleague and, in reply, out went Zhang Liao from Lu Bu’s side. And they four
fought.
Then fierce anger seized upon Lu Bu. Setting his trident halberd, he urged his
Red Hare forward to where the fight was waging. Seeing him approach, Xiahou Dun
and Yue Jing both fled, but Lu Bu pressed on after them, and Cao Cao’s army
lost the day. Retiring ten miles, they made a new camp. Lu Bu called in and
mustered his troops.
The day having gone against him, Cao Cao called a council, and Yu Jin said,
“From the hill tops today I saw a camp of our enemies on the west of Puyang.
They were but few men therein, and tonight after today’s victory, it will not
be defended. Let us attack; and if we can take the camp, we shall strike fear
into the heart of Lu Bu. This is our best plan.”
Cao Cao thought so too. He and six of his generals —-Cao Hong, Li Dian, Mao
Jie, Lu Qian, Yu Jin, and Dian Wei —-and twenty thousand horse and foot left
that night by a secret road for the camp.
In his camp Lu Bu was rejoicing for that day’s victory, when Chen Gong
reminded him, saying, “The western camp is importance point, and it might be
attacked.”
But Lu Bu replied, “The enemy will not dare approach after today’s
defeat.”
“Cao Cao is a very able commander,” replied Chen Gong. “You must keep a
good lookout for him lest he attack our weak spot.”
So arrangements were made for defense. Generals Gao Shun, Wei Xu, and Hou Cheng
were ordered to march there.
At dusk Cao Cao reached the camp and began an immediate attack on all four
sides. The defenders could not hold him off. They ran in all directions, and
the camp was captured. Near the fourth watch, when the defending party came,
Cao Cao sallied forth to meet them and met Gao Shun. Another battle then began
and waged till dawn. About that time a rolling of drums was heard in the west,
and they told Cao Cao that Lu Bu himself was at hand. Thereupon Cao Cao
abandoned the attack and fled.
Gao Shun, Wei Xu, and Hou Cheng pursued him, while Lu Bu blocked his escape
route. Cao Cao’s two generals, Yu Jin and Yue Jing, attacked Lu Bu’s troops
but could not break them. Cao Cao went away north. But from behind some hills
came out Zhang Liao and Zang Ba to attack. Lu Qian and Cao Hong were sent to
stop the attackers, but Lu Qian and Cao Hong were both defeated. Cao Cao sought
safety in the west. Here again his retreat was met by Lu Bu’s four generals,
Hao Meng, Cao Xing, Cheng Lian, and Song Xian.
The fight became desperate. Cao Cao dashed at the enemy’s array. The din was
terrible. Arrows fell like pelting rain upon them, and they could make no
headway.
Cao Cao was desperate and cried out in fear, “Who can save me?”
Then from the crush dashed out Dian Wei with his double spears, crying, “Fear
not, my lord!”
Dian Wei leapt from his steed, put aside his double spears, and laid hold of a
handful of battle-axes. Turning to his followers he said, “When the ruffians
are at ten paces, call out to me.”
Then he set off with mighty strides, plunging forward, careless of the flying
arrows. Lu Bu’s horsemen followed, and when they got near, Dian Wei’s
followers shouted, “Ten paces!”
“Five, then call!” shouted back Dian Wei, and went on.
Presently, “Five paces!”
Then Dian Wei spun round and flung the battle-axes. With every fling a man fell
from the saddle and never a battle-ax missed.
Having thus slain ten or so the remainder fled, and Dian Wei quickly remounted
his steed, set his twin spears and rushed again into the fight with a vigor
that none could withstand. One by one his opponents yielded, and he was able to
lead Cao Cao safely out of the press of battle. Cao Cao and his commanders went
to their camp.
But as evening fell, the noise of pursuit fell on their ears, and soon appeared
Lu Bu himself.
“Cao Cao, you rebel, do not flee!” shouted Lu Bu as he approached with his
halberd ready for a thrust.
All stopped and looked in each others’ faces: The soldiers were weary, their
steeds spent. Fear smote them, and they looked around for some place of refuge.
You may lead your lord safely out of the press,
But what if the enemy follow?
We cannot say here what Cao Cao’s fate was, but the next chapter will relate.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 12 ****
Xiahou Dun with a body of soldiers found his chief, checked the pursuit, and
fought with Lu Bu till dusk. Rain fell in torrents swamping everything; and as
the daylight waned, they drew off and Cao Cao reached camp. He rewarded Dian
Wei generously and advanced him in rank.
When Lu Bu reached his camp, he called in his adviser Chen Gong. Then Chen Gong
proposed a new stratagem.
He said, “In Puyang there is a rich, leading family, Tian by name, who number
thousands, enough to populate a whole county in themselves. Make one of these
people go to Cao Cao’s camp with a pretended secret letter about your
ferocity, and the hatred of the people, and their desire to be rid of you. And
spread the news that only Gao Shun is left to guard the city, and they would
help anyone who would come to save them. Thus our enemy Cao Cao will be
inveigled into the city, and we will destroy him either by fire or ambush. His
skill may be equal to encompassing the universe, but he will not escape.”
Lu Bu thought this trick might be tried, and they arranged for the Tian family
letter to be sent.
Coming soon after the defeat, when Cao Cao felt uncertain what step to take
next, the secret letter was read with joy:
“Lu Bu has marched to Liyang. The city’s defense is weak: You must attack
immediately, and we will render interior help. Follow the sign of a white flag
with the word Rectitude written thereon.”
“Heaven is going to give me Puyang!” said Cao Cao joyfully.
So he rewarded the messenger very liberally and began to prepare for the
expedition.
Then came Liu Ye, saying, “Lu Bu is no strategist, but Chen Gong is full of
guile. I fear treachery in this letter, and you must be careful. If you will
go, then enter with only one third your army, leaving the others outside the
city as a reserve.”
Cao Cao agreed to take this precaution. He went to Puyang, which he found gay
with fluttering flags. Looking carefully he saw among them, at the west gate,
the white flag with the looked-for inscription. His heart rejoiced.
That day, just about noon, the city gates opened, and two bodies of soldiers
appeared as if to fight. Gao Shun was the Front Commander, and Hou Cheng the
Rear Commander. Cao Cao told off his general, Dian Wei, to oppose them. Neither
body, however, came on to full engagement but fell back into the city. By this
move Dian Wei and his troops had been drawn close up to the drawbridge. From
within the city several soldiers were seen taking any chance of confusion to
escape and come outside.
To Cao Cao they said, “We are clients of the Tian family,” and they gave
him secret letters stating:
“The signal will be given about the first watch setting by beating a gong.
That will be the time to attack. The gates will be opened.”
So Cao Cao ordered Xiahou Dun to march to the left and Cao Hong to the right.
Cao Cao led the main army —-together with Xiahou Yuan, Li Dian, and Yue Jing
—-into the city.
Li Dian pressed upon his master the precaution, saying, “My lord should stay
outside the city. Let us go in first.”
But Cao Cao bade him be silent, saying, “If I do not go, who will advance?”
And so at the first watch Cao Cao led the way. The moon had not yet arisen. As
he drew near the west gate, they heard a crackling sound, then a loud shouting,
and then torches moved hither and thither. Next the gates were thrown wide
open, and Cao Cao, whipping up his steed, galloped in.
But when he reached the state residence, he noticed the streets were quite
deserted, and then he knew he had been tricked. Wheeling round his horse, he
shouted to his followers to retire. This was the signal for another move. An
explosion of a signal bomb was heard close at hand, and it was echoed from
every side in a deafening roar. Gongs and drums beat all around with a roar
like rivers rushing backward to their source, and the ocean boiling up from its
depths. From two sides east and west came bodies of soldiers eager to attack,
led by Lu Bu’s generals Zhang Liao and Zang Ba.
Cao Cao dashed off toward the north only to find his way barred by Hao Meng and
Cao Xing. Cao Cao tried for the south gate, but met enemies led by Gao Shun and
Hou Cheng. Cao Cao’s trusty commander Dian Wei, with fierce eyes and gritting
teeth, at last burst through and got out, with the enemy close after him.
But when Dian Wei reached the drawbridge, he glanced behind him and missed his
master. Immediately Dian Wei turned back and cut an alley inside. Just within
he met Li Dian.
“Where is our lord?” cried Dian Wei.
“I am looking for him!” said Li Dian.
“Quick! Get help from outside,” shouted Dian Wei. “I will seek him!”
So Li Dian hastened for aid, and Dian Wei slashed his way in, looking on every
side for Cao Cao. He was not to be found. Dashing out of the city, Dian Wei ran
up against Yue Jing, who asked where their lord was.
“I have entered the city twice in search of him, but cannot find him!” said
Dian Wei.
“Let us go in together.” said Yue Jing.
They rode up to the gate. But the noise of bombs and the pouring fire from the
gate tower frightened Yue Jing’s horse so that it refused to pass. Wherefore
Dian Wei alone went in, butting through the smoke and dashing through the
flames. But he got in and searched on every side.
When Cao Cao saw his sturdy protector Dian Wei cut his way out and disappear
leaving him surrounded, he again made an attempt to reach the north gate. On
the way, sharply silhouetted against the glow, he saw the figure of Lu Bu
coming toward him with his trident halberd ready to kill. Cao Cao covered his
face with his hand, whipped up his steed and galloped past.
But Lu Bu came galloping up behind him and tapping him on the helmet with the
halberd cried, “Where is Cao Cao?”
Cao Cao turned and, pointing to a dun horse well ahead, cried, “There: On
that dun! That is he!”
Hearing this Lu Bu left pursuing Cao Cao to gallop after the rider of the dun.
Thus relieved Cao Cao set off for the east gate. Then he fell in with Dian Wei,
who took him under his protection and fought through the press, leaving a trail
of death behind till they reached the gate. Here the fire was raging fiercely,
and burning beams were falling on all sides. The earth element seemed to have
interchanged with the fire element. Dian Wei warded off the burning pieces of
wood with his lance and rode into the smoke making a way for his lord. Just as
they were passing through the gate a flaming beam fell from the gate tower. Cao
Cao just warded it off with his arm, but it struck his steed on the quarters
and knocked the steed down. Cao Cao’s hand and arm were badly burned and his
hair and beard singed. Dian Wei turned back to his rescue. Luckily Xiahou Yuan
came along just then, and the two raised Cao Cao and set him on Xiahou Yuan’s
horse. And thus they got him out of the burning city. But they had to go
through heavy fighting till daybreak.
Cao Cao returned to his camp. His officers crowded about his tent, anxious for
news of his health. He soon recovered and laughed when he thought of his
escape.
“I blundered into that fool’s trap, but I will have my revenge,” said he.
“Let us have a new plan soon,” said Guo Jia.
“I will turn his trick to my own use. I will spread the false report that I
was burned in the fire, and that I died at the fifth watch. He will come to
attack as soon as the news gets abroad, and I will have an ambush ready for him
in Maling Hills. I will get him this time.”
“Really a fine stratagem!” said Guo Jia.
So the soldiers were put into mourning, and the report went everywhere that Cao
Cao was dead. And soon Lu Bu heard it, and he assembled his army at once to
make a surprise attack, taking the road by the Maling Hills to his enemy’s
camp.
As he was passing the hills, he heard the drums beating for an advance, and the
ambushing soldiers leapt out all round him. Only by desperate fighting did he
get out of the melee and with a sadly diminished force returned to his camp at
Puyang. There he strengthened the fortifications and could not be tempted forth
to battle.
This year locusts suddenly appeared, and they consumed every green blade. There
was a famine, and in the northeast grain rose to fifty strings of copper coins
a cart. People even took to cannibalism. Cao Cao’s army suffered from want,
and he marched them to Juancheng. Lu Bu took his troops to Shanyang. Perforce
therefore the fighting ceased.
In Xuzhou. Imperial Protector Tao Qian, over sixty years of age, suddenly fell
seriously ill, and he summoned his confident, Mi Zhu, to his chamber to make
arrangements for the future.
As to the situation the adviser said, “Cao Cao abandoned his attack on this
place because of his enemy’s seizure of Yanzhou; and now they are both
keeping the peace solely because of the famine. But Cao Cao will surely renew
the attack in the spring. When Liu Bei refused to allow you to vacate office in
his favor, you were in full vigor. Now you are ill and weak, and you can make
this a reason for retirement. He will not refuse again.”
So a message was sent to the little garrison town Xiaopei calling Liu Bei to a
counsel on military affairs. This brought him with his brothers and a slender
escort. He was at once called in to the sick man’s chamber. Quickly disposing
of the inquiries about his health, Tao Qian soon came to the real object of his
call for Liu Bei.
“Sir, I asked you to come for the sole reason that I am dangerously ill and
likely to die at any time. I look to you, Illustrious Sir, to consider the Hans
and their empire as more important than anything else, and so to take over the
symbols of office of this region, the commission and the seal, that I may close
my eyes in peace.”
“You have two sons, why not depute them to relieve you?” said Liu Bei.
“Both lack the requisite talents. I trust you will instruct them after I have
gone, but do not let them have the guidance of affairs.”
“But I am unequal to so great a charge.”
“I will recommend to you one who could assist you. He is Sun Qian from Beihai
who could be appointed to some post.”
Turning to Mi Zhu, Tao Qian said, “The noble Liu Bei here is the most
prominent man of the time, and you should serve him well.”
Still would Liu Bei have put from him such a post, but just then the Imperial
Protector, pointing to his heart to indicate his sincerity, passed away.
When the ceremonial wailing of the officials was over, the insignia of office
were brought to Liu Bei. But he would have none of them. The following days the
inhabitants of the town and country around crowded into the state residence,
bowing and with tears, calling upon Liu Bei to receive the charge.
“If you do not, we cannot live in peace!” said they.
To these requests his brothers added their persuasion, till at length he
consented to assume the administrative duties. He forthwith appointed Sun Qian
and Mi Zhu as his Advisers, and Chen Deng his Secretary. He moved his army from
Xiaopei to Xuzhou City, and he put forth proclamations to reassure the people.
He also attended to the burial ceremonies; he and all his army dressing in
mourning. After the fullest sacrifices and ceremonies, a burial place for the
late Imperial Protector was found close to the source of the Yellow River. The
dead man’s testament was forwarded to court.
The news of the events in Xuzhou duly reached the ears of Cao Cao, then in
Juancheng.
Said he, angrily, “I have missed my revenge. This Liu Bei has simply stepped
into command of the region without expending half an arrow: He sat still and
attained his desire. But I will put him to death and then dig up Tao Qian’s
corpse in revenge for the death of my noble father!”
Orders were issued for the army to prepare for a new campaign against Xuzhou.
But Adviser Xun Yu remonstrated with Cao Cao, saying, “The Supreme Ancestor
secured the Land Within the Passes and his illustrious successor on the throne,
Liu Xiu, took Henei. They both first consolidated their position whereby they
could command the entire empire. Their whole progress was from success to
success. Hence they accomplished their great designs in spite of difficulties.
“Illustrious Sir, your Land Within the Passes and your Henei are Yanzhou and
the Yellow River, which you had first, and which is of the utmost strategic
point of the empire. If you undertake this expedition against Xuzhou leaving
many troops here for defense, you will not accomplish your design; if you leave
too few, Lu Bu will fall upon us. And finally if you lose this and fail to gain
Xuzhou, whither will you retire? That region is not vacant. Although Tao Qian
has gone, Liu Bei holds it; and since the people support him, they will fight
to the death for him. To abandon this place for that is to exchange the great
for the small, to barter the trunk for the branches, to leave safety and run
into danger. I would implore you to reflect well.”
Cao Cao replied, “It is not a good plan to keep soldiers idle here during
such scarcity.”
“If that is so, it would be more advantageous to attack the eastern counties
of Chencheng, Yingchuan, and Runan, and feed your army on their supplies. The
remnants of the Yellow Scarves, He Yi and Huang Shao, are there with stores and
treasures of all kinds that they have amassed by plundering wherever they
could. Rebels of their stamp are easily broken. Break them, and you can feed
your army with their grain. Moreover, both the court and the common people will
join in blessing you.”
This new design appealed strongly to Cao Cao, and he quickly began his
preparations to carry it out. He left Xiahou Dun and Cao Ren to guard
Juancheng, while his main body, under his own command, marched to seize
Chencheng. This done they went to Runan and Yingchuan.
Now when the Yellow Scarves leaders, He Yi and Huang Shao, knew that Cao Cao
was approaching. They came out in a great body to oppose him. They met at Goat
Hill. Though the rebels were numerous, they were a poor lot, a mere pack of
beasts without organization and lacking discipline. Cao Cao ordered his strong
archers and vigorous crossbowmen to keep them in check.
Dian Wei was sent out to challenge. The rebel leaders chose a Second-in-Command
champion for their side, who rode out and was vanquished in the third bout.
Then Cao Cao’s army pushed forward, and they made a camp at Goat Hill.
The following day the rebel Huang Shao himself led forth his army and made his
battle array along a circle. A leader advanced on foot to offer combat. He wore
a yellow turban on his head and a green robe. His weapon was an iron mace.
He shouted, “I am He Man, the devil who shoots across the sky. Who dare fight
with me?”
Cao Hong uttered a great shout and jumped from the saddle to accept the
challenge. Sword in hand he advanced on foot and the two engaged in fierce
combat in the face of both armies. They exchanged some fifty blows, neither
gaining the advantage. Then Cao Hong feigned defeat and ran away. He Man went
after him. Just as he closed, Cao Hong tried a feint and then suddenly wheeling
about, wounded his adversary. Another slash, and He Man lay dead.
At once Li Dian dashed forward into the midst of the Yellow Scarves and laid
hands on the rebel chief Huang Shao whom he carried off captive. Cao Cao’s
troops then set on and scattered the rebels. The spoil of treasure and food was
immense.
The other rebel leader, He Yi, fled with a few hundred horsemen toward Gepei
Hills. But while on their road thither there suddenly appeared a force led by a
certain swashbuckler. This bravo was a well-built man, thickset and stout. With
a waist ten spans in girth. He used a long sword.
He barred the way of retreat. He Yi set his spear and rode toward him. But at
the first encounter the bravo caught He Yi under his arm and bore He Yi off a
prisoner. All the rebels were terror-stricken, dropped from their horses and
allowed themselves to be bound. Then the victor drove them like cattle into an
enclosure with high banks.
Presently Dian Wei, still pursuing the rebels, reached Gepei Hills. The
swashbuckler went out to meet him.
“Are you also a Yellow Scarves rebel?” said Dian Wei.
“I have some hundreds of them prisoners in an enclosure here.”
“Why not bring them out?” said Dian Wei.
“I will if you win this sword from my hand.”
This annoyed Dian Wei who attacked him. They engaged and the combat lasted for
two long hours and then was still undecided. Both rested a while. The
swashbuckler was the first to recover and renewed the challenge. They fought
till dusk and then, as their horses were quite spent, the combat was once more
suspended.
In the meantime some of Dian Wei’s men had run off to tell the story of this
wondrous fight to Cao Cao who hastened in amazement, followed by many officers
to watch it and see the result.
Next day the unknown warrior rode out again, and Cao Cao saw him. In Cao
Cao’s heart he rejoiced to see such a doughty hero and desired to gain his
services. So Cao Cao bade Dian Wei feign defeat.
Dian Wei rode out in answer to the challenge, and some thirty bouts were
fought. Then Dian Wei turned and fled toward his own side. The bravo followed
and came quite close. But a flight of arrows drove him away.
Cao Cao hastily drew off his men for one and a half miles and then secretly
sent a certain number to dig a pitfall and sent troops armed with hooks to lie
in ambush.
The following day Dian Wei was sent out with one hundred horse. His adversary
nothing loath came to meet Dian Wei.
“Why does the defeated leader venture forth again?” cried he laughing.
The swashbuckler spurred forward to join battle, but Dian Wei, after a faint
show of fighting, turned his horse and rode away. His adversary intent upon
capture, took no care, and he and his horse all blundered into the pitfall. The
hookmen took him captive, bound him, and carried him before Cao Cao.
As soon as he saw the prisoner, Cao Cao advanced from his tent, sent away the
soldiers, and with his own hands loosened the leader’s bonds. Then he brought
out clothing and dressed him, bade him be seated and asked who he was and
whence he came.
“I am named Xu Chu. I am from Qiao. When the rebellion broke out, my
relatives and I, numbered some hundreds, built a stronghold within a rampart
for protection. One day the robbers came, but I had stones ready for them. I
told my relatives to keep on bringing them up to me and I threw them, hitting
somebody every time I threw. This drove off the robbers. Another day they came,
and we were short of grain. So I agreed with them to an exchange of plow oxen
against grain. They delivered the grain and were driving away the oxen when the
beasts took fright and tore off to their pens. I seized two of oxen by the
tail, one with each hand, and hauled them backwards a hundred or so paces. The
robbers were so amazed that they thought no more about oxen but went their way.
So they never troubled us again.”
“I have heard of your mighty exploits,” said Cao Cao. “Will you join my
army?”
“That is my strongest desire,” said Xu Chu.
So Xu Chu called up his clan, some hundreds in all, and they formally submitted
to Cao Cao. Xu Chu received the rank of General and got ample rewards. The two
rebel leaders, He Yi and Huang Shao, were executed. Runan and Yingchuan were
now perfectly pacified.
Cao Cao withdrew his army and went back to Juancheng.
Xiahou Dun and Cao Ren came out to welcome him, and they told him, “Scouts
report that Yanzhou City has been left defenseless. Lu Bu’s generals, Xue Lan
and Li Fang, have given up all its garrison to plundering the surrounding
country. We must act without loss of time. With our soldiers fresh from
victory, the city will fall at a tap of the drum.”
So Cao Cao marched the army straight to the city. An attack was quite
unexpected but the two leaders, Xue Lan and Li Fang, hurried out their few
soldiers to fight.
Xu Chu, the latest recruit, said, “I wish to capture these two and make them
an introductory gift!”
The task was given him, and he rode forth. Li Fang with his halberd advanced to
meet Xu Chu. The combat was brief as Li Fang fell in the second bout. His
colleague Xue Lan retired with his troops. But he found the drawbridge had been
seized by Li Dian, so that he could not get shelter within the city. Xue Lan
led his men toward Juye. But Lu Qian pursued and killed him with an arrow. His
soldiers scattered to the four directions. And thus Yanzhou was recaptured.
Next Cheng Yu proposed an expedition to take Puyang. Cao Cao marched his army
out in perfect order. The Van Leaders were Dian Wei and Xu Chu; Xiahou Dun and
Xiahou Yuan led the left wing; Li Dian and Yue Jing led the right wing; Yu Jin
and Lu Qian guarded the rear. Cao Cao himself commanded the center.
When they approached Puyang, Lu Bu wished to go out in person and alone to
attack, but his adviser Chen Gong protested, saying, “General, you should not
go out until the arrival of the other officers.”
“Whom do I fear?” said Lu Bu.
So he threw caution to the winds and went out of the city. He met his foes and
began to revile them. The redoubtable Xu Chu went to fight with him, but after
twenty bouts neither combatant was any the worse.
“He is not the sort that one man can overcome,” said Cao Cao.
And he sent Dian Wei to attack Lu Bu from another direction. Lu Bu stood the
double onslaught. Soon after the flank commanders joined in —-Xiahou Dun and
Xiahou Yuan attacking the left; Li Dian and Yue Jing surrounding the right. Lu
Bu had six opponents. These proved really too many for him so he turned his
horse and rode back to the city.
But when the members of the Tian family saw him coming back beaten, they raised
the drawbridge.
Lu Bu shouted, “Open the gates! Let me in!”
But the Tians said, “We have gone over to Cao Cao!”
This was hard to hear and the beaten man abused them roundly before he left.
Chen Gong got away through the east gate taking with him the general’s
family.
Thus Puyang came into Cao Cao’s hands, and for their present services the
Tian family were pardoned their previous fault.
However, Liu Ye said, “Lu Bu is a savage beast. If let alive, he will be a
great danger. Hunt him down!”
Liu Ye was ordered to keep Puyang. Wherefore Cao Cao determined to follow Lu Bu
to Dingtao whither he had gone for refuge.
Lu Bu, Zhang Miao, and Zhang Chao were assembled in the city. Gao Shun and
other generals were out foraging. Cao Cao army arrived but did not attack for
many days, and presently he withdrew fifteen miles and made a stockade. It was
the time of harvest, and he set his soldiers to cut the wheat for food. The
spies reported this to Lu Bu who came over to see. But when he saw that Cao
Cao’s stockade lay near a thick wood, he feared an ambush and retired. Cao
Cao heard that Lu Bu had come and gone and guessed the reason.
“He fears an ambush in the wood,” said Cao Cao. “We will set up flags
there and deceive him. There is a long embankment near the camp, but behind it
there is no water. There we will lay an ambush to fall upon Lu Bu when he comes
to burn the wood.”
So Cao Cao hid all his soldiers behind the embankment except half a hundred
drummers, and he got together many peasants to loiter within the stockade as
though it was not empty.
Lu Bu rode back and told Chen Gong what he had seen.
“This Cao Cao is very crafty and full of wiles,” said the adviser. “Do
not act.”
“I will use fire this time and burn out his ambush,” said Lu Bu.
Next morning Lu Bu rode out, and there he saw flags flying everywhere in the
wood. He ordered his troops forward to set fire on all sides. But to his
surprise no one rushed out to make for the stockade. Still he heard the beating
of drums and doubt filled his mind. Suddenly he saw a party of soldiers move
out from the shelter of the stockade. He galloped over to see what it meant.
Then the signal-bombs exploded: Out rushed the troops and all their leaders
dashed forward. Xiahou Dun, Xiahou Yuan, Xu Chu, Dian Wei, Li Dian, and Yue
Jing all attacked at once. Lu Bu was at a loss and fled into the open country.
One of his generals, Cheng Lian, was killed by an arrow of Yue Jing. Two thirds
of his troops were lost, and the beaten remainder went to tell Chen Gong what
had come to pass.
“We had better leave,” said Chen Gong. “An empty city cannot be held.”
So Chen Gong and Gao Shun, taking their chief’s family with them, abandoned
Dingtao. When Cao Cao’s soldiers got into the city, they met with no
resistance. Zhang Chao committed suicide by burning himself. Zhang Miao fled to
Yuan Shu.
Thus the whole northeast fell under the power of Cao Cao. He immediately
tranquilized the people and rebuilt the cities and their defenses (AD 195).
Lu Bu in his retreat fell in with his generals, and Chen Gong also rejoined
him, so that he was by no means broken.
“I have but a small army,” said Lu Bu, “but still enough to break Cao
Cao!”
And so he retook the backward road. Indeed:
Thus does fortune alternate, victory and defeat,
The happy conqueror today, tomorrow must retreat?
What was the fate of Lu Bu will appear later.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 13 ****
The last chapter told of the defeat of Lu Bu, and his gathering the remnant of
his army at Dingtao. When all his generals had joined him, he began to feel
strong enough to try conclusions with Cao Cao once again.
Said Chen Gong, who was opposed to this course, “Cao Cao is too strong right
now. Seek some place where we can rest a time before trying.”
“Suppose I went to Yuan Shao,” said Lu Bu.
“Send first to make inquiries.”
Lu Bu agreed.
The news of the fighting between Cao Cao and Lu Bu had reached Jizhou, and one
of Yuan Shao’s advisers, Shen Pei, warned him, saying, “Lu Bu is a savage
beast. If he gets possession of Yanzhou, he will certainly attempt to add this
region to it. For your own safety you should help to crush him.”
Wherefore Yuan Shao sent Yan Liang with fifty thousand troops to destroy Lu Bu.
The spies heard this and at once told Lu Bu, who was greatly disturbed and
called in Chen Gong.
“Go over to Liu Bei, who has lately succeeded to Xuzhou,” said Chen Gong.
Hence Lu Bu went thither.
Hearing this, Liu Bei said, “Lu Bu is a hero, and we will receive him with
honor.”
But Mi Zhu was strongly against receiving him, saying, “He was a cruel,
bloodthirsty beast!”
But Liu Bei replied, “How would misfortune have been averted from Xuzhou, if
he had not attacked Yanzhou? He cannot have bad intention, now that he comes
seeking an asylum.”
“Brother, your heart is really too good. Although it may be as you say, yet
it would be well to prepare,” said Zhang Fei.
Liu Bei with a great following met Lu Bu ten miles outside the city gates, and
the two chiefs rode in side by side. They proceeded to the residence and there,
after the elaborate ceremonies of reception were over, they sat down to
converse.
Said Lu Bu, “After Minister of the Interiror Wang Yun and I plotted to slay
Dong Zhuo and my misfortune in the Li Jue and Guo Si’s sedition, I drifted
about from one place to another, and none of the nobles in the East of Huashan
Mountains seemed willing to receive me. When Cao Cao with wicked ambition
invaded this region and you, Sir, came to its rescue, I aided you by attacking
Yanzhou and thus diverting a portion of his force. I did not think then that I
should be the victim of a vile plot and lose my leaders and my soldiers. But
now if you will, I offer myself to you that we may together accomplish great
designs.”
Liu Bei replied, “When the late Imperial Protector Tao Qian died, there was
no one to administer Xuzhou, and so I assumed that task for a time. Now since
you are here, General, it is most suitable that I step down in your favor.”
Whereupon Liu Bei took the insignia and the seal of authority and handed them
to Lu Bu. Lu Bu was on the point of accepting them, when he saw Guan Yu and
Zhang Fei, who stood behind Liu Bei, glaring at him with angry eyes.
So Lu Bu put on a smile and said, “I may be something of a fighting man, but
I could not rule a great region like this.”
Liu Bei repeated his offer.
But Chen Gong said, “The strong guest does not oppress his host. You need not
fear, my lord!”
Then Liu Bei desisted. Banquets were held and dwelling places prepared for the
guest and his retinue.
As soon as convenient, Lu Bu returned the feast. Liu Bei went with his two
brothers. Half through the banquet Lu Bu requested Liu Bei to retire to one of
the inner private rooms, whither Guan Yu and Zhang Fei followed him. There Lu
Bu bade his wife and daughter bow as to their benefactor. Here also Liu Bei
showed excessive modesty.
Lu Bu said, “Good younger brother, you need not be so very modest.”
Zhang Fei heard what Lu Bu said, and his eyes glared, shouting, “What sort of
a man are you that dares call our brother ‘younger brother’? He is one of
the ruling family —-a jade leaf on a golden branch. Come out, and I will
fight you three hundred bouts for the insult!”
Liu Bei hastily checked the impulsive one, and Guan Yu persuaded him to go
away.
Then Liu Bei apologized, saying, “My poor brother talks wildly after he has
been drinking. I hope you will not blame him.”
Lu Bu nodded, but said nothing. Soon after the guests departed. But as the host
escorted Liu Bei to his carriage, he saw Zhang Fei galloping up armed as for a
fray.
“Lu Bu, you and I will fight that duel of three hundred bouts!” shouted
Zhang Fei.
Liu Bei bade Guan Yu check him. Next day Lu Bu came to take leave of his host.
“You, O Lord, kindly received me, but I fear your brothers and I cannot
agree. So I will seek some other asylum.”
“General, if you go, the blame is mine. My rude brother has offended and must
eventually apologize. In the meantime what think you of a temporary sojourn at
the town where I was encamped for some time, Xiaopei? The place is small and
mean, but it is near, and I will see to it that you are supplied with all you
need.”
Lu Bu thanked him and accepted this offer. He led his troops there and took up
residence. After he had gone, Liu Bei reproved Zhang Fei for what he did, and
Zhang Fei did not again refer to the matter.
That Cao Cao had subdued the region around Shandong Mountains has been stated
before. He memorialized the Throne and was rewarded with the title of General
Who Exhibits Firm Virtue and Lord of Feiting.
At this time Li Jue and Guo Si were commanding the court. Li Jue had made
himself Regent Marshal, and his colleague Guo Si styled himself Grand
Commander. Their conduct was abominable but no one dared to criticize them.
Imperial Guardian Yang Biao and Minister Zhu Jun privately talked with Emperor
Xian and said, “Cao Cao has over two hundred thousand troops and many capable
advisers and leaders. It would be well for the empire if he would lend his
support to the imperial family and help to rid the government of this evil
party.”
His Majesty wept, “I am weary of the insults and contempt of these wretches
and should be very glad to have them removed.”
“I have thought of a plan to estrange Li Jue and Guo Si and so make them
destroy each other. Then Cao Cao could come and cleanse the court,” said Yang
Biao.
“How will you manage it?” asked the Emperor.
“Guo Si’s wife, Lady Qiong, is very jealous, and we can take advantage of
her weakness to bring about a quarrel.”
So Yang Biao received instruction to act, with a secret edict to support him.
So Yang Biao’s wife, Lady Kai, made an excuse to visit Lady Qiong at her
palace and, in the course of conversation, said “There is talk of secret
liaison between the General, your husband, and the wife of Minister Li Jue. It
is a great secret, but if Minister Li Jue knew it, he might try to harm your
husband. I think you ought to have very little to do with that family.”
Lady Qiong was surprised but said, “I have wondered why he has been sleeping
away from home lately, but I did not think there was anything shameful
connected with it. I should never have known if you had not spoken. I must put
a stop to it.”
By and by, when Lady Kai took her leave, Lady Qiong thanked her warmly for the
information she had given.
Some days passed, and Guo Si was going over to the dwelling of Li Jue to a
dinner.
Lady Qiong did not wish him to go and she said, “This Li Jue is very deep,
and one cannot fathom his designs. You two are not of equal rank, and if he
made away with you, what would become of your poor handmaid?”
Guo Si paid no attention, and his wife could not prevail on him to stay at
home. Late in the afternoon some presents arrived from Li Jue’s palace, and
Lady Qiong secretly put poison into the delicacies before she set them before
her lord.
Guo Si was going to taste at once but she said, “It is unwise to consume
things that come from outside. Let us try on a dog first.”
They did, and the dog died. This incident made Guo Si doubt the kindly
intentions of his colleague.
One day, at the close of business at court, Li Jue invited Guo Si to his
palace. After Guo Si arrived home in the evening, rather the worse for too much
wine, he was seized with a colic. His wife said she suspected poison and
hastily administered an emetic, which relieved the pain.
Guo Si began to feel angry, saying, “We did everything together and helped
each other always. Now he wants to injure me! If I do not get in the first
blow, I shall suffer some injury.”
So Guo Si began to prepare his guards for any sudden emergency.
This was told to Li Jue, and he in turn grew angry, saying, “So Guo Si is
doing so and so!”
Then Li Jue got his guards under way and came to attack Guo Si. Both houses had
ten thousand, and the quarrel became so serious that they fought a pitched
battle under the city walls. When that was over both sides turned to plunder
the people.
Then a nephew of Li Jue, Li Xian, suddenly surrounded the Palace, put the
Emperor and Empress in two carriages, and assigned Jia Xu and Zuo Ling to carry
them off. The Palace attendants were made to follow on foot. As they went out
of the rear gate, they met Guo Si’s army who began to shoot at the cavalcade
with arrows. They killed many attendants before Li Jue’s army came up and
forced them to retire.
The carriages got out of the Palace and eventually reached Li Jue’s camp,
while Guo Si’s soldiers plundered the Palace and carried off all the women
left there to their camp. Then the Palace was set on fire.
As soon as Guo Si heard of the whereabouts of the Emperor, he came over to
attack the camp of Li Jue. The Emperor between these two opposing factions was
greatly alarmed. Indeed:
Slowly the Hans had declined but renewed their vigor with Liu Xiu,
Twelve were the rulers before him, followed him also twelve others.
Foolish were two of the latest, dangers surrounded the altars,
These were degenerate days, with authority given to eunuchs.
Then did He Jin the simple, the inept, who commanded the army,
Warriors call to the capital, wishing to drive out the vermin;
Though they drove out the leopards, tigers and wolves quickly entered.
All kinds of evil were wrought by a low class creature from Xizhou.
Wang Yun, honest of heart, beguiled this wretch with a woman,
Much desired of his henchman, thus sowing seeds of dissension.
Strife resulted, and peace no longer dwelt in the empire.
No one suspected that Li Jue and Guo Si would continue the evil,
Much to the sorrow of the Middle Kingdom; yet they stove for a trifle.
Famine stalked in the Palace, grief for the clashing of weapons;
Why did the warlords strive? Why was the land thus partitioned?
They had turned aside from the way appointed of Heaven.
Kings must ponder these things; heavy the burden lies on them,
Chiefest in all the realm theirs is no common appointment,
Should the King falter or fail, calamities fall on the multitude people,
The empire is drenched with their blood, grisly ruin surrounds them.
Steeped in sorrow and sad, read you the ancient records;
Long is the tale of years; the tale of sorrow is longer.
Wherefore one who would rule, chiefly must exercise forethought.
This and a keen-edged blade, these must suffice to maintain one.
Guo Si’s army arrived, and Li Jue went out to give battle. Guo Si’s troops
had no success and retired. Then Li Jue removed the imperial captives to Meiwo
with his nephew Li Xian as gaoler. Supplies were reduced, and famine showed
itself on the faces of the eunuchs. The Emperor sent to Li Jue to request five
carts of rice and five sets of bullock bones for his attendants.
Li Jue angrily replied, “The court gets food morning and evening. Why do they
ask for more?”
He sent putrid meat and rotten grain.
The Emperor was very vexed at the new insult, uttering, “How dare the rebels
do that to me?”
Court Counselor Yang Qi advised patience, saying, “Li Jue is a base creature
but, under the present circumstances, Your Majesty must put up with it. You may
not provoke him.”
The Emperor bowed and was silent, but the tears fell on his garments.
Suddenly someone came in with the tidings: “A force of cavalry, their sabers
glittering in the sun, are approaching to rescue the Chariot!”
Then they heard the gongs beat and the roll of the drums. The Emperor sent to
find out who it was. But it was Guo Si, and the sadness fell again.
Presently arose a great din. For Li Jue had gone out to do battle with Guo Si,
whom he abused by name.
“I treated you well, and why did you try to kill me?” said Li Jue.
“You are a rebel, why should I not slay you?” cried Guo Si.
“You call me rebel when I am guarding the Emperor?”
“You have abducted him: Do you call that guarding?”
“Why so many words? Let us forgo a battle and settle the matter in single
combat, the winner to take the Emperor and go.”
The two generals fought in front of their armies, but neither could prevail
over the other.
Then they saw Yang Biao come riding up to them, crying, “Rest a while, O
Commanders! For I have invited a party of officers to arrange a peace.”
Wherefore the two leaders retired to their camps. Soon Yang Biao, Zhu Jun, and
sixty other officials came up and went to Guo Si’s camp. They were all thrown
into confinement.
“We came with good intentions,” they moaned, “and we are treated like
this!”
“Li Jue has run off with the Emperor; I have to have the officers,” said
Guo Si.
“What does it mean? One has the Emperor, the other his officers. What do you
want?” said Yang Biao.
Guo Si lost patience and drew his sword, but General Yang Mi persuaded him not
to slay the speaker. Then Guo Si released Yang Biao and Zhu Jun but kept the
others in the camp.
“Here we are —-two officers of the Throne —-, and we cannot help our
lord. We have been born in vain!” said Yang Biao to Zhu Jun.
Throwing their arms about each other, they wept and fell swooning to the earth.
Zhu Jun went home, fell seriously ill and died.
Thereafter the two adversaries fought every day for nearly three months, each
losing many soldiers.
Now Li Jue was irreligious and practiced magic. He often called witches to beat
drums and summon spirits, even when in camp. Jia Xu used to remonstrate with
him, but quite uselessly.
Yang Qi said to the Emperor, “That Jia Xu, although a friend of Li Jue, never
seems to have lost the sense of loyalty to Your Majesty.”
Soon after Jia Xu himself arrived.
The Emperor sent away his attendants and said to Jia Xu, weeping the while,
“Can you not pity the Hans and help me?”
Jia Xu prostrated himself, saying, “That is my dearest wish. But, Sire, say
no more: Let thy servant work out a plan.”
The Emperor dried his tears, and soon Li Jue came in. He wore a sword by his
side and strode straight up to the Emperor, whose face became the color of
clay.
Then Li Jue spoke, “Guo Si has failed in his duty and imprisoned the court
officers. He wished to slay Your Majesty, and you would have been captured but
for me.”
The Emperor joined his hands together in salute and thanked Li Jue. Li Jue went
away.
Before long Huangfu Li entered. The Emperor, knowing him as a man of persuasive
tongue and that he came from the same county as Li Jue, bade him go to both
factions to try to arrange peace.
Huangfu Li accepted the mission and first went to Guo Si, who said, “I would
release the officers if Li Jue would restore the Emperor to full liberty.”
Huangfu Li then went to the other side.
To Li Jue he said, “Since I am a Xiliang man, the Emperor and the officers
have selected me to make peace between you and your adversary. Guo Si has
consented to cease the quarrel. Will you agree to peace?”
“I overthrew Lu Bu, have upheld the government for four years, and have many
great services to my credit as all the world knows. That other fellow, that
horse-thief, has dared to seize the officers of state and to set himself up
against me. I have sworn to slay him. Look around you. Do you not think my army
large enough to break him?”
“It does not follow,” said Huangfu Li. “In ancient days in Youqiong, Hou
Yi, proud of and confident in his archer’s skill, gave no thought to others
and governed alone, and he so perished. Lately you yourself have seen the
powerful Dong Zhuo betrayed by Lu Bu, who had received many benefits at his
hands. In no time Dong Zhuo’s head was hanging over the gate. So you see mere
force is not enough to ensure safety. Now you are a general, with the axes and
whips and all the symbols of rank and high office; your descendants and all
your clan occupy distinguished positions. You must confess that the state has
rewarded you liberally. True, Guo Si has seized the officers of state, but you
have done the same to the ‘Most Revered’. Who is worse than the other?”
Li Jue angrily drew his sword and shouted, “Did the Son of Heaven send you to
mock and shame me?”
But his commander, Yang Feng, checked him.
“Guo Si is still alive,” said Yang Feng, “and to slay the imperial
messenger would be giving him a popular excuse to raise an army against you.
And all the nobles would join him.”
Jia Xu also persuaded Li Jue, and gradually his wrath cooled down. Huangfu Li
was urged to go away.
But Huangfu Li would not be satisfied with failure. As he went out of the camp,
he cried loudly, “Li Jue will not obey the Emperor’s command. He will kill
his prince to set up himself!”
Counselor Hu Miao tried to shut Huangfu Li’s mouth, saying, “Do not utter
such words. You will only bring hurt upon yourself!”
But Huangfu Li shrieked at him also, saying, “You also are an officer of
state, and yet you even back up the rebel. When the prince is put to shame, the
minister dies. That is our code. If it be my lot to suffer death at the hands
of Li Jue, so be it!”
And Huangfu Li maintained a torrent of abuse. The Emperor heard of the
incident, called in Huangfu Li and sent him away to his own country Xiliang.
Now more than half Li Jue’s troops were from Xiliang, and he had also the
assistance of the Qiangs, the northern tribespeople beyond the border. When
Huangfu Li spread that Li Jue was a rebel and so were those who helped him, and
that there would be a day of heavy reckoning, those stories disturbed the
soldiers.
Li Jue sent one of his officers, General Wang Chan of the Tiger Army, to arrest
Huangfu Li. But Wang Chan had a sense of right and esteemed Huangfu Li as an
honorable man. Instead of carrying out the orders, Wang Chan returned to say
Huangfu Li could not be found.
Meanwhile Jia Xu tried to work on the feelings of the tribespeople.
He said to them, “The Son of Heaven knows you are loyal to him and have
bravely fought and suffered. He has issued a secret command for you to go home,
and then he will reward you.”
The tribesmen had a grievance against Li Jue for not paying them, so they
listened readily to the insidious persuasions of Jia Xu and deserted.
Then Jia Xu advised the Emperor, “Li Jue is covetous in nature. He is
deserted and enfeebled. A high office should be granted to him to lead him
astray.”
So the Emperor officially appointed Li Jue Regent Marshal. This delighted him
greatly, and he ascribed his promotion to the potency of his wise witches’
prayers and incantations. He rewarded those people most liberally.
But his army was forgotten. Wherefore his commander, Yang Feng, was angry.
Yang Feng said to General Song Guo, “We have taken all the risks and exposed
ourselves to stones and arrows in his service, yet instead of giving us any
reward he ascribes all the credit to those witches of his.”
“Let us put him out of the way and rescue the Emperor,” said Song Guo.
“You explode a bomb within as signal, and I will attack from outside.”
So the two agreed to act together that very night in the second watch. But they
had been overheard, and the eavesdropper told Li Jue. Song Guo was seized and
put to death. That night Yang Feng waited outside for the signal and while
waiting, out came Li Jue himself. Then a melee began, which lasted till the
fourth watch. But Yang Feng got away and fled to Xian.
But from this time Li Jue’s army began to fall away, and he felt more than
ever the losses caused by Guo Si’s frequent attacks. Then came news that
Zhang Ji, at the head of a large army, was coming down from Shanxi to make
peace between the two factions. Zhang Ji vowed he would attack the one who was
recalcitrant. Li Jue tried to gain favor by hastening to send to tell Zhang Ji
he was ready to make peace. So did Guo Si.
So the strife of the rival factions ended at last, and Zhang Ji memorialized
asking the Emperor to go to Hongnong near Luoyang.
The Emperor was delighted, saying, “I have longed to go back to the east.”
Zhang Ji was rewarded with the title of Commander of the Flying Cavalry and was
highly honored. Zhang Ji saw to it that the Emperor and the court had good
supplies of necessaries. Guo Si set free all his captive officers, and Li Jue
prepared transport for the court to move to the east. Li Jue told off companies
of his Royal Guard to escort the cavalcade.
The progress had been without incident as far as Xinfeng. Near Baling Bridge
the west wind of autumn came on to blow with great violence, but soon above the
howling of the gale was heard the trampling of a force of several hundred. They
stopped at a bridge and barred the way.
“Who comes?” cried a voice.
“The Imperial Chariot is passing, and who dares stop it?” said Court
Counselor Yang Qi, riding forward.
Two generals of the barring party advanced to Yang Qi, saying, “General Guo
Si has ordered us to guard the bridge and stop all spies. You say the Emperor
is here: We must see him, and then we will let you pass.”
So the pearl curtain was raised, and the Emperor said, “I, the Emperor, am
here. Why do you not retire to let me pass, gentlemen?”
They all shouted, “Wan shui! Long Life! Long Life!” and fell away to allow
the cortege through.
But when they reported what they had done, Guo Si was very angry, saying, “I
meant to outwit Zhang Ji, seize the Emperor, and hold him in Meiwo. Why have
you let him get away?”
He put the two officers to death, set out to pursue the cavalcade, and overtook
it just at the county of Huaying.
The noise of a great shouting arose behind the travelers, and a loud voice
commanded, “Stop the train!”
The Emperor burst into tears.
“Out of the wolf’s den into the tiger’s mouth!” said he.
No one knew what to do: They were all too frightened. But when the rebel army
was just upon them, they heard the beating of drums and from behind some hills
came into the open a cohort of more than one thousand soldiers preceded by a
great flag bearing the name Han General Yang Feng.
Having defeated by Li Jue, Yang Feng fled to the foothills of Xian; and he came
up to offer his services as soon as he heard the Emperor’s journey. Seeing it
was necessary to fight now, he drew up his line of battle.
Guo Si’s general, Cui Yong, rode out and began a volley of abuse.
Yang Feng turned and said, “Where is Xu Huang?”
In response out came a valiant warrior gripping a heavy battle-ax. He galloped
up on his fleet bay, making directly for Cui Yong, whom he felled at the first
blow. At this the whole force dashed forward and routed Guo Si. The defeated
army went back some seven miles.
Yang Feng rode forward to see the Emperor, who graciously said, “It is a
great service you have rendered: You have saved my life.”
Yang Feng bowed and thanked him, and the Emperor asked to see the actual slayer
of the rebel leader. So Xu Huang was led to the chariot, where he bowed and was
presented as Xu Huang of Hedong.
The Emperor recognized the achievement of the warrior.
Then the cavalcade went forward, Yang Feng acting as escort as far as the city
of Huaying, the halting place for the night. The commander of the place, Duan
Wei, supplied them with clothing and food. And the Emperor passed the night in
Yang Feng’s camp.
Next day Guo Si, having mustered his troops, appeared in front of the camp, and
Xu Huang rode out to engage. But Guo Si threw his army out so that they
entirely surrounded the camp, and the Emperor was in the middle. The position
was very critical, when help appeared in the person of a galloping general from
the southeast, and the rebels fell away at his assault. Then Xu Huang smote
them and so scored a victory.
When they had time to see their helper, they found him to be Dong Cheng, the
uncle of the Emperor or the “State Uncle”. The Emperor wept as he related
his sorrows and dangers.
Said Dong Cheng, “Be of good courage, Sire. General Yang Feng and I have
pledged ourselves to kill both the rebels Li Jue and Guo Si and so purify the
world.”
The Emperor bade them travel east as soon as possible, and so they went on
night and day till they reached their destination Hongnong.
Guo Si led his defeated army back. Meeting Li Jue, he told Li Jue of the rescue
of the Emperor and whither they was going.
“If they reach the Huashan Mountains and get settled in the east, they will
send out proclamations to the whole country, calling up the nobles to attack
us, and we and our whole clans will be in danger,” said Guo Si.
“Zhang Ji is holding Changan, and we must be careful. There is nothing to
prevent a joint attack on Hongnong, when we can kill the Emperor and divide the
empire between us,” said Li Jue.
Guo Si found this a suitable scheme, so their armies came together again in one
place and united in plundering the countryside. As they proceeded to Hongnong,
they left destruction behind them.
Yang Feng and Dong Cheng heard of the rebels’ approach when they were yet a
long way off, so Yang Feng and Dong Cheng turned back and decided to meet them
at Dongjian.
Li Jue and Guo Si had previously made their plan. Since the loyal troops were
few as compared with their own horde, they would overwhelm the loyal troops
like a flood. So when the day of battle came, they poured out covering the
hills and filling the plains. Yang Feng and Dong Cheng devoted themselves
solely to the protection of the Emperor and Empress. The officials, the
attendants, the archives and records, and all the paraphernalia of the court
were left to care for themselves. The rebels ravaged Hongnong, but the two
protectors got the Emperor safely away into Shanbei.
When the rebel generals showed signs of pursuit, Yang Feng and Dong Cheng had
to play a double-edged sword. They sent to offer to discuss terms of peace with
Li Jue and Guo Si; at the same time they sent a secret edict to enlist help
from the leaders of the White Wave rebels —-Han Xian, Li Yue, and Hu Cai. The
White Wave was a branch of the Yellow Scarves, and Li Yue was actually a
brigand and had ravaged throughout the woods and hills. But the need for help
was so desperate.
These three, being promised pardon for their faults and crimes and a grant of
official rank, naturally responded to the call, and thus the loyal side was
strengthened so that Hongnong was recaptured. But meanwhile Li Jue and Guo Si
laid waste whatever place they reached, slaying the aged and weakly, forcing
the strong to join their ranks. When going into a fight they forced these
people-soldiers to the front, and they called them the “Dare-to-Die”
soldiers.
Li Jue and Guo Si’s force was overwhelming. When Li Yue, the White Wave
leader, approached with his army, Guo Si bade his soldiers scatter clothing and
valuables along the road. The late robbers could not resist the temptation, so
a scramble began. Then Guo Si’s soldiers fell upon the disordered ranks and
did much damage. Yang Feng and Dong Cheng had to take the Emperor away to the
north.
Li Jue and Guo Si pursued.
Li Yue said, “The danger is grave. I pray Your Majesty mount a horse and go
in advance!”
The Emperor replied, “I cannot bear to abandon my officers.”
They wept and struggled on as best they could. The White Wave leader Hu Cai was
killed in one attack.
The enemy came very near, and the Emperor left his carriage and went on foot.
Yang Feng and Dong Cheng escorted him to the bank of the Yellow River. Li Yue
sought a boat to ferry him to the other side. The weather was very cold, and
the Emperor and Empress cuddled up close to each other shivering. They reached
the river but the banks were too high, and they could not get down into the
boat.
So Yang Feng proposed, “Fasten together the horses’ bridles and lower down
His Majesty slung by the waist.”
However, the Empress’ brother, Fu De, said, “I found some ten rolls of
plain silk from dead soldiers, and we can use them instead.”
And they rolled up the two imperial personages in the silk, and thus they
lowered them down near the boat. Then Li Yue took up his position in the prow
leaning on his sword. Fu De carried the Empress on his back into the boat.
The boat was too small to carry everybody, and those unable to get on board
clung to the cable, but Li Yue cut them down, and they fell into the water.
They ferried over the Emperor and then sent back the boat for the others. There
was a great scramble to get on board, and they had to chop off the fingers and
hands of those who persisted in clinging to the boat. The lamentation rose to
the heavens.
When they mustered on the farther bank, many were missing, only a dozen of the
Emperor’s suite were left. Yang Feng found a bullock cart and transported the
Emperor and Empress to Dayang. They had no food and at night sought shelter in
a poor, tile-roofed house. Some old country folks offered them boiled millet,
but it was too coarse to be swallowed.
Next day the Emperor conferred titles on those who had protected him. Li Yue
was made General Who Conquers the North, and Han Xian was appointed General Who
Conquers the East.
The flight continued. Soon two officers of rank came up with the cortege, and
they bowed before His Majesty with many tears. They were Imperial Guardian Yang
Biao and Court Administrator Han Rong. The Emperor and Empress lifted up their
voices and wept with them.
Said Han Rong to his colleague, “The rebels have confidence in my words. You
stay as guard of the Emperor, and I will take my life in my hands and try to
bring about peace.”
After Han Rong had gone, the Emperor rested for a time in Yang Feng’s camp.
But Yang Biao requested the Emperor to head for Anyi and make the capital
there. When the train reached the town, they found it containing not a single
lofty building, and the court lived in grass huts devoid even of doors. They
surrounded these with a fence of thorns as a protection, and within this the
Emperor held counsel with his ministers. The soldiers camped round the fence.
Now Li Yue and his fellow ruffians showed their true colors. They wielded the
powers of the Emperor as they wished, and officials who offended them were
beaten or abused even in the presence of the Emperor. They purposely provided
thick wine and coarse food for the Emperor’s consumption. He struggled to
swallow what they sent. Li Yue and Han Xian joined in recommending to the
Throne the names of convicts, common soldiers, sorcerers, leeches, and such
people who thus obtained official ranks. There were more than two hundred of
such people. As seals could not be engraved, pieces of wood were hammered into
some sort of a shape. Court affairs had never degraded to such a low point.
Now Han Rong went to see Li Jue and Guo Si. After listening to his vigorous
persuasions, the two rebel generals agreed to set free the officials and Palace
people.
A famine occurred that same year and people were reduced to eating grass from
the roadside. Starving, they wandered hither and thither. But food and clothing
were sent to the Emperor from the Governor of Henei, Zhang Yang, and the
Governor of Hedong, Wang Yi, and the court began to enjoy a little repose.
Dong Cheng and Yang Feng sent laborers to restore the palaces in Luoyang with
the intention of moving the court thither. Li Yue was opposed to this.
Dong Cheng argued, “Luoyang is the original capital as opposed to the paltry
town of Anyi. Removal would be but reasonable.”
Li Yue wound up by saying, “You may get the court to remove, but I shall
remain here.”
But when the consent of the Emperor had been given and a start made by Dong
Cheng and Yang Feng, Li Yue secretly sent to arrange with Li Jue and Guo Si to
capture the Emperor. However, this plot leaked out, and the escort so arranged
as to prevent such a thing, and they pressed on to the pass at Gu Hills as
rapidly as possible. Li Yue heard this and, without waiting for his rebel
colleagues to join him, set out to act alone.
About the fourth watch, just as the cavalcade was passing Gu Hills, a voice was
heard shouting, “Stop those carriages! Li Jue and Guo Si are here!”
This frightened the Emperor greatly, and his terror increased when he saw the
whole mountain side suddenly light up. Indeed:
The rebel party, erstwhile split in twain,
To work their wicked will now join three again.
How the Son of Heaven escaped this peril will be told in the next chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 14 ****
the army was that of the two arch rebels Li Jue and Guo Si come to capture the
imperial cavalcade.
But Yang Feng recognized the voice of Li Yue and said, “This is only the
cohort of Li Yue!”
He bade Xu Huang go out to fight him. Xu Huang went and in the first bout the
traitor fell. The White Wave rebels scattered.
The travelers got safely through Gu Pass. Here the Governor of Henei, Zhang
Yang, supplied them plentifully with food and other necessaries and escorted
the Emperor to Zhidao. For his timely help, the Emperor conferred upon Zhang
Yang the rank of a Regent General. Yang Feng moved his army to the northeast of
Luoyang and camped at Yewang.
Capital Luoyang was presently entered. Within the walls all was destruction.
The palaces and halls had been burned, the streets were overgrown with grass
and brambles and obstructed by heaps of ruins. The palaces and courts were
represented by broken roofs and toppling walls. A small “palace” however
was soon built, and therein the officers of court presented their
congratulations, standing in the open air among thorn bushes and brambles. The
reign style was changed from Prosperous Stability to Rebuilt Tranquillity, the
first year (AD 196).
The year was grievous with famine. The Luoyang people, even reduced in numbers
as they were to a few hundred families, had not enough to eat and they prowled
about stripping the bark off trees and grubbing up the roots of plants to
satisfy their starving hunger. Officers of the government of all but the
highest ranks went out into the country to gather fuel. Many people were
crushed by the falling walls of burned houses. At no time during the decadence
of Han did misery press harder than at this period.
A poem written in pity for the sufferings of that time says:
Mortally wounded, the white serpent poured forth its life blood at Mangdang
Hills;
Blood-red pennons of war waved then in every quarter,
Chieftain with chieftain strove and raided each other’s borders,
Midst the turmoil and strife the Kingship even was threatened.
Wickedness stalks in a country when the King is a weakling,
Brigandage always is rife, when a dynasty’s failing,
Had one a heart of iron, wholly devoid of feeling,
Yet would one surely grieve at the sight of such desolation.
Imperial Guardian Yang Biao memorialized the Throne, saying, “The decree
issued to me some time ago has never been acted upon. Now Cao Cao is very
strong in the Shandong Mountains, and it would be well to associate him in the
government that he might support the ruling house.”
The Emperor replied, “There was no need to refer to the matter again. Send a
messenger when you will.”
So the decree went forth and a messenger bore it into the Shandong Mountains.
Now when Cao Cao had heard that the court had returned to Capital Luoyang, he
called together his advisers to consult.
Xun Yu laid the matter before Cao Cao and the council thus: “Eight hundred
years ago, Duke Wen of Jin supported Prince Xiang of the declining Zhou
Dynasty, and all the feudal lords backed Duke Wen. The Founder of the Hans, Liu
Bang, won the popular favor by wearing mourning for Emperor Yi of Chu. Now
Emperor Xian has been a fugitive on the dusty roads. To take the lead in
offering an army to restore him to honor is to have an unrivaled opportunity to
win universal regard. But you must act quickly, or someone will get in before
you!”
Cao Cao understood and at once prepared his army to move. Just at this moment
an imperial messenger was announced with the very command Cao Cao wanted, and
Cao Cao immediately set out.
At Luoyang everything was desolate. The walls had fallen, and there were no
means of rebuilding them, while rumors and reports of the coming of Li Jue and
Guo Si kept up a state of constant anxiety.
The frightened Emperor spoke with Yang Feng, saying, “What can be done? There
is no answer from the East of Huashan, and our enemies are near!”
Then Yang Feng and Han Xian said, “We, your ministers, will fight to the
death for you!”
But Dong Cheng said, “The fortifications are weak and our military resources
small, so that we cannot hope for victory, and what does defeat mean? I see
nothing better to propose than a move into the East of Huashan Mountains.”
The Emperor agreed to this, and the journey began without further preparation.
There being few horses, the officers of the court had to march afoot. Hardly a
bowshot outside the gate they saw a thick cloud of dust out of which came all
the clash and clamor of an advancing army. The Emperor and his Consort were
dumb with fear. Then appeared a horseman; he was the messenger returning from
the East of Huashan Mountains.
He rode up to the chariot, made an obeisance, and said, “General Cao Cao, as
commanded, is coming with all the military force of the East of Huashan; but
hearing that Li Jue and Guo Si had again approached the capital, he has sent
Xiahou Dun in advance. With Xiahou Dun are ten capable leaders and fifty
thousand cavalry. They will guard Your Majesty.”
All fear was swept away. Soon after Xiahou Dun and his staff arrived. Xiahou
Dun, Xu Chu, and Dian Wei were presented to the Emperor, who graciously
addressed them. Then one came to say a large army was approaching from the
east, and at the Emperor’s command Xiahou Dun went to ascertain who these
were. He soon returned saying they were Cao Cao’s infantry.
In a short time Cao Hong, Li Dian, and Yue Jing came to the imperial chariot
and their names having been duly communicated.
Cao Hong said, “When my brother, Cao Cao, heard of the approach of the
rebels, he feared that the advance guard he had sent might be too weak, so he
sent me to march quickly for reinforcement.”
“General Cao Cao is indeed a trusty servant!” said the Emperor.
Orders were given to advance, Cao Hong leading the escort. By and by scouts
came to say that the rebels were coming up very quickly. The Emperor bade
Xiahou Dun divide his force into two parts to oppose them. Xiahou Dun and Cao
Hong’s armies threw out two wings with cavalry in front and foot behind. They
attacked with vigor and beat off Li Jue and Guo Si’s cohorts with a severe
loss of ten thousand. Then Xiahou Dun and Cao Hong begged the Emperor to return
to Luoyang, and Xiahou Dun guarded the city.
Next day Cao Cao came with his great army, and having got them duly camped he
went into the city to audience. He knelt at the foot of the steps, but was
called up hither to stand beside the Emperor and be thanked.
Cao Cao replied, “Having been the recipient of great bounty, thy servant owes
the state much gratitude. The measure of evil of the two rebels is full, but I
have two hundred thousand of good soldiers to oppose them, and those soldiers
are fully equal to securing the safety of Your Majesty and the Throne. The
preservation of the state sacrifice is the matter of real moment.”
High honors were conferred on Cao Cao. He was appointed Commander of Capital
District, Minister of War, and granted Military Insignia.
The two rebels, Li Jue and Guo Si, wished to attack Cao Cao’s army while
fatigued from its long march.
But their adviser, Jia Xu, opposed this, saying, “There was no hope of
victory. He has both strong soldiers and brave leaders. Submission may bring us
amnesty.”
Li Jue was angry at the suggestion, crying, “Do you wish to dishearten the
army?”
And he drew his sword on Jia Xu. But the other officers interceded and saved
the adviser. That same night Jia Xu stole out of the camp and, quite alone,
took his way home to his native village.
Soon the rebels decided to offer battle. In reply, Cao Cao sent out Xu Chu, Cao
Ren, and Dian Wei with three hundred horse. These three leaders dashed into the
rebels army but quickly retired. This maneuver was repeated, and again repeated
before the real battle array was formed.
Then Li Xian and Li Bie, nephews of Li Jue, rode out. At once from Cao Cao’s
side dashed out Xu Chu and cut down Li Xian. Li Bie was so startled that he
fell out of the saddle. He too was slain. The victor Xu Chu rode back to his
own side with the two heads.
When Xu Chu offered them to the chief, Cao Cao patted him on the back, crying,
“You are really my Fan Kuai!”
Next a general move forward was made, Xiahou Dun and Cao Hong leading the two
wings and Cao Cao in the center. They advanced to the roll of the drum. The
rebels fell back before them and presently fled. They pursued, Cao Cao himself
leading, sword in hand. The slaughter went on till night. Ten thousands were
killed and many more surrendered. Li Jue and Guo Si went west, flying in panic
like dogs from a falling house. Having no place of refuge they took to the
hills and hid among the brushwood.
Cao Cao’s army returned and camped again near the capital.
Then Yang Feng and Han Xian said one to another, “This Cao Cao has done a
great service, and he will be the man in power. There will be no place for
us.”
So they represented to the Emperor that they wished to pursue the rebels, and
under this excuse withdrew their army and camped at Daliang.
One day the Emperor sent to summon Cao Cao to audience. The messenger was
called in. Cao Cao noticed that the messenger looked remarkably well and could
not understand it seeing that everyone else looked hungry and famine stricken.
So Cao Cao said, “You look plump and well, Sir, how do you manage it?”
“Only this: I have lived meager for thirty years.”
Cao Cao nodded, “What office do you hold?”
“I am a graduate recommended for filial piety and honesty. I had offices
under Yuan Shao and Zhang Yang, but came here when the Emperor returned. Now I
am one of the secretaries. I am a native of Dingtao, and my name is Dong
Zhao.”
Cao Cao got up from his place and crossed over, saying, “I have heard of you.
How happy I am to meet you!”
Then wine was brought into the tent, and Xun Yu was called in and introduced.
While they were talking, a man came in to report that a party was moving
eastward. Cao Cao ordered to find out whose people these were, but Dong Zhao
knew at once.
“They are old leaders under the rebels, Yang Feng and the White Wave General
Han Xian. They are running off because you have come, Illustrious Sir!”
“Do they mistrust me?” said Cao Cao.
“They are not worthy of your attention. They are a poor lot.”
“What of this departure of Li Jue and Guo Si?”
“Tigers without claws, birds without wings —-they will not escape you very
long. They are not worth thinking about.”
Cao Cao saw that he and his guest had much in common, so he began to talk of
affairs of state.
Said Dong Zhao, “You, Illustrious Sir, with your noble army have swept away
rebellion and have become the mainstay of the Throne, an achievement worthy of
the ancient Five Protectors. But the officials will look at it in very
different ways and not all favorably to you. I think you would not be wise to
remain here, and I advise a change of capital to Xuchang. However, it must be
remembered that the restoration of the capital has been published far and wide
and the attention of all the people is concentrated on Luoyang, hoping for a
period of rest and tranquillity. Another move will displease many. However, the
performance of extraordinary deed may mean the acquisition of extraordinary
merit. It is for you to decide.”
“Exactly my own inclination!” said Cao Cao, seizing his guest’s hand.
“But are there not dangers? Yang Feng at Daliang and the court officials!”
“That is easily managed. Write to Yang Feng and set his mind at rest. Then
say to the high officials plainly that there is no food in the capital here,
and so you are going to another place where there is, and where there is no
danger of scarcity. When they hear it, they will approve.”
Cao Cao had now decided; and as his guest took leave, Cao Cao seized his hands
once more, saying, “I shall need your advice in future affairs.”
Dong Zhao thanked and left. Thereafter Cao Cao and his advisers secretly
discussed the change of capital.
Now Court Counselor Wang Li, who was an astrologer, said to Liu Cai, Royal Clan
Recorder, “I have been studying the stars. Since last spring Venus has been
nearing the Guard star in the neighborhood of the Measure, and the Cowherd (the
Great Bear and Vega) crossing the River of Heaven. Mars has been retrograding
and came into conjunction with Venus in the Gate of Heaven, so that metal
(Venus) and fire (Mars) are mingled. Thence must emerge a new ruler. The aura
of the Hans is exhausted, and the ancient states of Jin and Wei must
increase.”
A secret memorial was presented to the Emperor, saying:
“The Mandate of Heaven has its course, and the five elements —-metal, wood,
water, fire, and earth —-are out of proportion. Earth attacking fire is Wei
attacking Han, and the successor to the empire of Han is in Wei.”
Cao Cao heard of these sayings and memorials and sent a man to the astrologer
to say, “Your loyalty is well known, but the ways of Heaven are past finding
out. The less said the better.”
Then Cao Cao discussed with Xun Yu.
The adviser expounded the meaning thus: “The virtue of Han was fire; your
element is earth. Xuchang is under the influence of earth, and so your fortune
depends on getting there. Fire can overcome earth, as earth can multiply wood.
Dong Zhao and Wang Li agree, and you have only to hide your time.”
So Cao Cao made up his mind.
Next day at court he said, “Luoyang is deserted and cannot be restored, nor
can it be supplied easily with food. Xuchang is a noble city, resourceful and
close to Luyang, which is a grain basin. It is everything that a capital should
be. I venture to request that the court move thither.”
The Emperor dared not oppose and the officials were too overawed to have any
independent opinion, so they chose a day to set out. Cao Cao commanded the
escort, and the officials all followed. When they had traveled a few stages,
they saw before them a high mound and from behind this there arose the beating
of drums.
Then Yang Feng and Han Xian came out and barred the way. In front of all stood
Xu Huang, who shouted, “Cao Cao is stealing away the Emperor!”
Cao Cao rode out and took a good look at this man. He seemed a fine fellow; and
in his secret soul Cao Cao greatly admired him, although he was an enemy. Then
Cao Cao ordered Xu Chu to go and fight Xu Huang. The combat was battle-ax
against broadsword, and the two men fought more than half a hundred bouts
without advantage to either side. Cao Cao then beat the gongs and drew off his
troops.
In the camp a council was called. Cao Cao said, “The two rebels themselves
need not be discussed; but Xu Huang is a fine general, and I was unwilling to
use any great force against him. I want to win him over to our side.”
Then stepped out Man Chong, replying, “Do not let that trouble you. I will
have a word with him. I shall disguise myself as a soldier this evening and
steal over to the enemy’s camp to talk to him. I shall incline his heart
toward you.”
That night Man Chong, duly disguised, got over to the other side and made his
way to the tent of Xu Huang, who sat there by the light of a candle. Xu Huang
was still wearing his coat of mail.
Suddenly Man Chong ran out in front and saluted, saying, “You have been well
since we parted, old friend?”
Xu Huang jumped up in surprise, gazed into the face of the speaker a long time,
and presently said, “What! You are Man Chong of Shanyang? What are you doing
here?”
“I am an officer in General Cao Cao’s army. Seeing my old friend out in
front of the army today, I wanted to say a word to him. So I took the risk of
stealing in this evening, and here I am.”
Xu Huang invited Man Chong in, and they sat down.
Then said Man Chong, “There are very few as bold as you on earth. Why then do
you serve such as your present chiefs, Yang Feng and Han Xian? My master is the
most prominent man in the world —-a man who delights in wise people and
appreciates soldiers as everyone knows. Your valor today won his entire
admiration, and so he took care that the attack was not vigorous enough to
sacrifice you. Now he has sent me to invite you to join him. Will you not leave
darkness for light and help him in his magnificent task?”
Xu Huang sat a long time pondering over the offer.
Then he said, with a sigh, “I know my masters are doomed to failure, but I
have followed their fortunes a long time and do not like to leave them.”
“But you know the prudent bird selects its tree, and the wise servant chooses
his master. When one meets a worthy master and lets him go, one is very
reckless.”
“I am willing to do what you say,” said Xu Huang, rising.
“Why not put these two to death as an introductory gift?” said Man Chong.
“It is very wrong for a servant to slay his master. I will not do that.”
“True. You are really a good man.”
Then Xu Huang, taking only a few horsemen of his own men with him, left that
night and deserted to Cao Cao. Soon someone took the news to Yang Feng, who at
the head of a thousand strong horsemen, set out to capture the deserter.
As they drew close, Yang Feng called out, “Betrayer! Stop there!”
But Yang Feng fell into an ambush. Suddenly the whole mountain side was lit up
with torches and out sprang Cao Cao’s troops, he himself being in command.
“I have been waiting here a long time. Do not run away!” cried Cao Cao.
Yang Feng was completely surprised and tried to draw off, but was quickly
surrounded. Then Han Xian came to his rescue, and a confused battle began. Yang
Feng succeeded in escaping, while Cao Cao kept up the attack on the two
disordered armies. A great number of the rebels gave in, and the leaders found
they had too few men left to maintain their independence, so they betook
themselves to Yuan Shu.
When Cao Cao returned to camp, the newly surrendered general was presented and
well received. Then again the cavalcade set out for the new capital. In due
time they reached Xuchang, and they built palaces and halls, an ancestral
temple and an altar, terraces and public offices. The walls were repaired,
storehouses built and all put in order.
Then came the rewards for Cao Cao’s adherents and others. Dong Cheng and
thirteen others were raised to rank of lordship. All good service was rewarded;
certain others again, who deserved it, were punished, all according to Cao
Cao’s sole decision.
Cao Cao made himself Prime Minister, Regent Marshal, and Lord of Wuping. Xun Yu
was made Imperial Counselor and Chair of the Secretariat; Xun You, Minister of
War; Guo Jia, Minister of Rites and Religion; Liu Ye, Minister of Works; Mao
Jie, Minister of Agriculture, and together with Ren Jun, they were put over the
supervision of military farms and stores. Cheng Yu was appointed Lord of
Dongping; Dong Zhao, Magistrate of Luoyang; Man Chong, Magistrate of Xuchang.
Xiahou Dun, Xiahou Yuan, Cao Ren, Cao Hong, Lu Qian, Li Dian, Yue Jing, Yu Jin,
and Xu Huang were made Commanders; Xu Chu and Dian Wei, Commanders of Capital
District. All good service received full recognition.
Cao Cao was then the one man of the court. All memorials went first to him and
were then submitted to the Throne.
When state matters were in order, Cao Cao gave a great banquet in his private
quarters to all his advisers, and affairs outside the capital were the subject
of discussion.
Then Cao Cao said, “Liu Bei has his army at Xuzhou, and he carries on the
administration of the region. Lu Bu fled to Liu Bei when defeated, and Liu Bei
gave Lu Bu Xiaopei to live in. If these two agreed to join forces and attack,
my position would be most serious. What precautions can be taken?”
Then rose Xu Chu, saying, “Give me fifty thousand of picked soldiers, and I
will give the Prime Minister both their heads!”
Xun Yu said, “O Leader, you are brave, but we must consider the present
circumstance. We cannot start a sudden war just as the capital has been
changed. However, there is a certain ruse known as ‘Rival Tigers and One
Prey’. Liu Bei has no decree authorizing him to govern the region. You, Sir
Prime Minister, can procure one for him, and when sending it, and so conferring
upon him the right in addition to his might, you can enclose a private note
telling him to get rid of Lu Bu. If he does, then he will have lost a vigorous
warrior from his side, and he could be dealt with as occasions serve. Should he
fail, then Lu Bu will slay him. This is the ‘Rival Tigers and One Prey’
ruse: They wrangle and bite each other.”
Cao Cao agreed that this was a good plan, so he memorialized for the formal
appointment, which he sent to Liu Bei. Liu Bei was created General Who Conquers
the East, Lord of Yicheng, and Imperial Protector of Xuzhou as well. At the
same time a private note was enclosed.
In Xuzhou, when Liu Bei heard of the change of capital, he began to prepare a
congratulatory address. In the midst of this an imperial messenger was
announced and was met which all ceremony outside the gate. When the epistle had
been reverently received, a banquet was prepared for the messenger.
The messenger said, “This decree was obtained for you by Prime Minister Cao
Cao.”
Liu Bei thanked him. Then the messenger drew forth his secret letter.
After reading it, Liu Bei said, “This matter can be easily arranged.”
The banquet over and the messenger conducted to his lodging to seek repose. Liu
Bei, before going to rest, called in his councilors to consider the letter.
“There need be no compunction about putting him to death,” said Zhang Fei.
“Lu Bu is a bad man.”
“But he came to me for protection in his weakness: How can I put him to
death? That would be immoral,” said Liu Bei.
“If he was a good man, it would be difficult,” replied Zhang Fei.
Liu Bei would not consent.
Next day, when Lu Bu came to offer congratulations, he was received as usual.
He said, “I have come to felicitate you on the receipt of the imperial
bounty.”
Liu Bei thanked him in due form. But then he saw Zhang Fei draw his sword and
come up the hall as if to slay Lu Bu. Liu Bei hastily interfered and stopped
Zhang Fei.
Lu Bu was surprised and said, “Why do you wish to slay me, Zhang Fei?”
“Cao Cao says you are immoral and tells my brother to kill you,” shouted
Zhang Fei.
Liu Bei shouted again and again to Zhang Fei to go away, and he led Lu Bu into
the private apartments out of the way. Then he told Lu Bu the whole story and
showed him the secret letter.
Lu Bu wept as he finished reading, “This is that miscreant’s scheme for
sowing discord between us.”
“Be not anxious, elder brother,” said Liu Bei. “I pledge myself not to be
guilty of such an infamous crime.”
Lu Bu again and again expressed his gratitude, and Liu Bei kept him for a time.
They remained talking and drinking wine till late.
Asked Guan Yu and Zhang Fei later, “Why not kill him?”
Liu Bei said, “Because Cao Cao fears that Lu Bu and I may attack him, he is
trying to separate us and get us to swallow each other, while he steps in and
takes the advantage. Is there any other reason?”
Guan Yu nodded assent, but Zhang Fei said, “I want to get him out of the way,
lest he would trouble us later.”
“That is not what a noble man should do,” said his elder brother.
Soon the messenger was dismissed and returned to the capital with a the reply
from Liu Bei. The letter only said the instruction would take time to plan and
implement. But the messenger, when he saw Cao Cao, told him the story of Liu
Bei’s pledge to Lu Bu.
Then said Cao Cao, “The plan has failed. What next?”
Xun Yu replied, “I have another trick called ‘Tiger against Wolf’ in
which the tiger is made to gobble up the wolf.”
“Let us hear it,” said Cao Cao.
“Send to Yuan Shu to say that Liu Bei has sent up a secret memorial to the
Throne that he wishes to subdue the southern regions around the Huai River.
Yuan Shu will be angry and attack him. Then you will order Liu Bei to dispose
of Yuan Shu and so set them destroying each other. Lu Bu will certainly think
that is his chance and turn traitor. This is the ‘Tiger against Wolf’
trick.”
Cao Cao thought this good and sent the messenger and also sent a false edict to
Liu Bei. When this came, the messenger was received with all the ceremonies,
and the edict ordered the capture of Yuan Shu. After the departure of the
bearer, Liu Bei called Mi Zhu who pronounced it a ruse.
“It may be,” said Liu Bei, “but the royal command is not to be
disobeyed.”
So the army was prepared and the day fixed.
Sun Qian said, “A trusty man must be left on guard of the city.”
And Liu Bei asked which of his brothers would undertake this task.
“I will guard the city,” said Guan Yu.
“I am constantly in need of your advice, so how can we part?” said Liu Bei.
“I will guard the city,” said Zhang Fei.
“You will fail,” said Liu Bei. “After one of your drinking bouts, you
will get savage and flog the soldiers. Beside you are rash and will not listen
to anyone’s advice. I shall be uneasy all the time.”
“Henceforth I will drink no more wine, I will not beat the soldiers, and I
will always listen to advice,” said Zhang Fei.
“I fear the mouth does not correspond to the heart,” said Mi Zhu.
“I have followed my elder brother these many years and never broken faith.
Why should you be contemptuous?” said Zhang Fei.
Liu Bei said, “Though you say this, I do not feel quite satisfied. I will
order Adviser Chen Deng to help you and keep you sober. Then you will not make
any mistake.”
Chen Deng was willing to undertake this duty, and the final orders were given.
The army of thirty thousand, horse and foot, left Xuzhou and marched toward
Nanyang.
When Yuan Shu heard that a memorial had been presented proposing to take
possession of his territories, he broke out into abuse of Liu Bei.
“You weaver of mats! You plaiter of straw shoes! You have been smart enough
to get possession of a large region and elbow your way into the ranks of the
nobles. I was just going to attack you, and now you dare to scheme against me!
How I detest you!”
So Yuan Shu at once gave orders to prepare an army of one hundred thousand,
under Ji Ling, to attack Xuzhou. The two armies met at Xuyi, where Liu Bei was
encamped in a plain with hills behind and a stream on his flank, for his army
was small.
Ji Ling was a native of the East of Huashan Mountains. He used a very heavy
three-edged sword.
After he had made his camp, he rode out and began abusing his opponents,
shouting, “Liu Bei, you rustic bumpkin, how dare you invade this land?”
“I have a decree ordering me to destroy the Governor who behaves improperly.
If you oppose, you will be assuredly punished,” replied Liu Bei.
Ji Ling angrily rode out brandishing his weapon.
But Guan Yu cried, “Fool, do not attempt to fight!”
And Guan Yu rode out to meet him. Then they two fought and after thirty bouts
neither had an advantage. Then Ji Ling cried out for a rest. So Guan Yu turned
his horse away, rode back to his own array and waited for Ji Ling.
When the moment came to renew the combat, Ji Ling sent out one of his officers,
Xun Zheng, to take his place.
But Guan Yu said, “Tell Ji Ling to come. I must settle with him who shall be
tiger and who shall be deer!”
“You —-a reputationless leader and unworthy to fight with our general!”
replied Xun Zheng.
This reply angered Guan Yu, who made just one attack on Xun Zheng and brought
him to the ground. At this success Liu Bei urged on the army, and Ji Ling’s
troops were defeated.
They retired to the mouth of River Huaiyin and declined all challenges.
However, many of their troops were sent into Liu Bei’s camp for harassment,
and many of them were slain. The two armies thus stood facing each other.
In Xuzhou, after Liu Bei had started on his expedition, Zhang Fei placed his
colleague and helper, Chen Deng, in charge of the administration of the region,
keeping military affairs under his own supervision. After thinking over the
matter or some time, he gave a banquet to all the military officers.
When they were all seated, he made a speech: “Before my brother left, he bade
me keep clear of the wine cup for fear of accidents. Now, gentlemen, you may
drink deep today. But from tomorrow wine is forbidden, for we must keep the
city safe. So take your fill.”
And with this he and all his guests rose to drink together.
The wine bearer came to Cao Bao who declined it, saying, “I never drink as I
am forbidden by religion.”
“What! A fighting man does not drink wine!” said the host. “I want you to
take just one cup.”
Cao Bao was afraid to offend, so he drank.
Now Zhang Fei drank huge goblets with all his guests on every hand and so
swallowed a huge quantity of liquor. He became quite intoxicated. Yet he would
drink more and insisted on a cup with every guest. It came to the turn of Cao
Bao who declined.
“Really, I cannot drink,” said Cao Bao.
“You drank just now: Why refuse this time?”
Zhang Fei pressed him, but still Cao Bao resisted.
Then Zhang Fei in his drunken madness lost control of his temper and said,
“If you disobey the orders of your general, you shall be beaten one hundred
strokes!”
And he called in his guards.
Here Chen Deng interfered, saying, “Do you remember the strict injunctions of
your brother before he left?”
“You civilians attend to your civil business and leave us alone,” said
Zhang Fei.
The only way of escape for the guest was to beg remission, and Cao Bao did so,
saying, “Sir, if you saw my son-in-law’s face, you would pardon me.”
“Who is your son-in-law?”
“Lu Bu.”
“I did not mean to have you really beaten; but if you think to frighten me
with Lu Bu, I will! I will beat you as if I were beating him!” said Zhang
Fei.
The guests interposed to beg him off, but their drunken host was obdurate, and
the unhappy guest received fifty blows. Then at the earnest prayers of the
others the remainder of the punishment was remitted.
The banquet came to an end, and the beaten Cao Bao went away burning with
resentment. That night he sent a letter to Xiaopei relating the insults he had
received from Zhang Fei. The letter told Lu Bu of Liu Bei’s absence and
proposed that a sudden raid should be made that very night before Zhang Fei had
recovered from his drunken fit. Lu Bu at once summoned Chen Gong and told him.
“Xiaopei is only a place to occupy temporarily,” said Chen Gong. “If you
can seize Xuzhou, do so. It is a good chance.”
Lu Bu got ready at once and soon on the way with five hundred cavalrymen,
ordering Chen Gong and Gao Shun to follow him with the main body.
Xiaopei being only about fifteen miles away, Lu Bu was under the walls at the
fourth watch. It was clear moonlight. No one on the ramparts saw him.
Lu Bu came up close to the wall and called out, “Liu Bei’s secret messenger
has arrived!”
The guards on the wall were Cao Bao’s people, and they called him. Cao Bao
came, and when he saw who was there, he ordered the gates to be opened. Lu Bu
gave the secret signal, and the soldiers entered shouting.
Zhang Fei was in his apartment sleeping off the fumes of wine. His servants
hastened to arouse him and told him an enemy had got the gates open.
They said, “Lu Bu got in, and there is fighting in the city!”
Zhang Fei savagely got into his armor and laid hold of his mighty serpent
halberd. But as he was mounting his horse at the gate, the attacking soldiers
came up. He rushed at them but being still half intoxicated made but a poor
fight. Lu Bu knowing Zhang Fei’s prowess did not press him hard, and Zhang
Fei made his way, with eighteen leading guards of Yan, to the east gate, and
there went out, leaving Liu Bei’s family to their fate.
Cao Bao, seeing Zhang Fei had but a very small force and was still half drunk
as well, came in pursuit. Zhang Fei saw who it was and was mad with rage. He
galloped toward Cao Bao and drove him off after a few passes. He followed Cao
Bao to the moat and wounded him in the back. Cao Bao’s frightened steed
carried its master into the moat, and he was drowned.
Once well outside the city Zhang Fei collected his troops, and they rode off
toward the south direction.
Lu Bu having surprised the city set himself to restore order. He put guards
over the residence of Liu Bei so that no one should disturb the family.
Zhang Fei with his few followers went to his brother’s camp at Xuyi and told
his story of treachery and surprise. All were greatly distressed.
“Success is not worth rejoicing; failure is not worth grieving,” said Liu
Bei with a sigh.
“Where are our sisters?” asked Guan Yu.
“They shared the fate of the city.”
Liu Bei nodded his head and was silent.
Guan Yu with an effort controlled his reproaches and said, “What did you say
when you promised to guard the city, and what orders did our brother give you?
Now the city is lost and therewith our sisters-in-law. Have you done well?”
Zhang Fei was overwhelmed by remorse. He drew his sword to kill himself.
He raised the cup in pledge,
None might say nay;
Remorseful, drew the sword,
Himself to slay.
Zhang Fei’s fate will be told in the next chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 15 ****
In the last chapter it was recorded that Zhang Fei was about to end his life
with his own weapon in Xuyi.
But Liu Bei rushed forward and caught Zhang Fei in his arms, snatched away the
sword, and threw it on the earth.
Liu Bei said, “The ancient had a saying: ‘Brothers are as hands and feet;
wives and children are as clothing. You may mend your torn dress, but who can
reattach a lost limb?’ We three, by the Oath of the Peach Garden, swore to
seek the same death day. The city is lost, it is true, and my wives and little
ones, but I could not bear that we should die ere our course be run. Beside,
Xuzhou was not really ours, and Lu Bu will not harm my family but will rather
seek to preserve them. You made a mistake, worthy brother, but is it the one
deserving of death?”
And Liu Bei wept. His brothers were much affected, and their tears fell in
sympathy.
As soon as the news of Lu Bu’s successful seizure of his protector’s region
reached Yuan Shu, Yuan Shu sent promises of valuable presents to Lu Bu to
induce him to join in a further attack on Liu Bei. The presents are said to
have been fifty thousand carts of grain, five hundred horses, ten thousand
ounces of gold and silver, and a thousand rolls of colored silk.
Lu Bu swallowed the bait and ordered Gao Shun to lead forth fifty thousand
troops. But Liu Bei heard of the threatened attack, so he made inclement
weather an excuse to moved his few soldiers out of Xuyi for Guangling, before
the attacking force came up.
However, Gao Shun demanded the promised reward through Ji Ling, who put Gao
Shun off, saying, “My lord has gone away. I will settle this as soon as I can
see him and get his decision.”
With this answer Gao Shun returned to Lu Bu, who could not decide what to do.
Then came a letter from Yuan Shu:
“Although Gao Shun had gone to attack Liu Bei, yet Liu Bei had not been
destroyed, and no reward could be given till he was actually taken.”
Lu Bu railed at what he called the breach of faith and was inclined to attack
Yuan Shu himself.
However, his adviser, Chen Gong, opposed this course, saying, “You should
not. Yuan Shu is in possession of Shouchun and has a large army, well supplied.
You are no match for him. Rather ask Liu Bei to take up his quarters at Xiaopei
as one of your wings and, when the time comes, let him lead the attack, both
south and north. Then Yuan Shu and Yuan Shao will fall before you, and you will
be very powerful.”
Finding this advice good, Lu Bu sent letters to Liu Bei asking him to return.
After the flight of Liu Bei, Yuan Shu attacked Guangling and reduced Liu
Bei’s force by half. When the messenger from Lu Bu came, Liu Bei read the
letter. He was quite content with the offer, but his brothers were not inclined
to trust Lu Bu.
“Such a dishonorable man must have a motive,” said Guan Yu and Zhang Fei.
“Since he treats me kindly, I cannot but trust him,” replied Liu Bei.
So Liu Bei went back to Xuzhou. Lu Bu, fearing that Liu Bei might doubt his
sincerity, restored Liu Bei’s family; and when Lady Gan and Lady Mi saw their
lord, they told him that they had been kindly treated and guarded by soldiers
against any intrusion, and provisions had never been wanting.
“I knew he would not harm my family,” said Liu Bei to Guan Yu and Zhang
Fei.
However, Zhang Fei was not pleased and would not accompany his brothers into
the city when they went to express their thanks. He went to escort the two
ladies to Xiaopei.
At the interview Lu Bu said, “I did not wish to take the city, but your
brother behaved very badly, drinking and flogging the soldiers, and I came to
guard it lest some evil should befall.”
“But I had long wished to yield it to you,” said Liu Bei.
Thereupon Lu Bu wished to retire in favor of Liu Bei who, however, would not
hear of it. Liu Bei returned and took up his quarters in Xiaopei, but his two
brothers would not take the situation kindly and were very discontented.
Said Liu Bei, “One must bow to one’s lot. It is the will of Heaven, and one
cannot struggle against fate.”
Lu Bu sent presents of food and stuffs, and peace reigned between the two
houses.
In Shouchun, Yuan Shu prepared a great banquet for his soldiers when it was
announced that Sun Ce had subdued Lu Gang, the Governor of Lujiang. Yuan Shu
summoned the victor, who made obeisance at the foot of the hall of audience.
Yuan Shu, sitting in state, asked for details of the campaign and then invited
Sun Ce to the banquet.
After the unhappy death of his father Sun Jian, Sun Ce had returned to the
lower region of the Great River, where he had devoted himself to peaceful ends,
inviting to his side good people and able scholars. Afterwards, when a quarrel
broke out between his mother’s brother, Governor Wu Jing of Dangyang, and the
late Imperial Protector of Xuzhou, Tao Qian, Sun Ce removed his mother with all
the family to Que, he himself taking service under Yuan Shu, who admired and
loved him greatly.
“If I had a son like Sun Ce,” said Yuan Shu, “I should die without
regret.”
Yuan Shu appointed Sun Ce Commander and sent him on various expeditions, all of
which were successful. After this banquet to celebrate the victory over Lu
Gang, Sun Ce returned to his camp very bitter over the arrogant and patronizing
airs of his patron. Instead of retiring to his tent, Sun Ce walked up and down
by the light of the moon.
“Here am I, a mere nobody, and yet my father was such a hero!”
And he cried out and wept in spite of himself.
Then suddenly appeared one who said, laughing loudly, “What is this, Sun Ce?
While your noble father enjoyed the light of the sun, he made free use of me.
If his son has any difficulty to resolve, why does he not refer it to me also
instead of weeping here alone?”
Looking at the speaker Sun Ce saw it was Zhu Zhi, a native of Dangyang, who had
been in Sun Jian’s service. Sun Ce then ceased weeping, and they two sat
down.
“I was weeping from regret at being unable to continue my father’s work,”
said Sun Ce.
“Why stay here bound to the service of a master? The Governor of Dangyang is
in distress. Why not get command of an army under the pretense of an expedition
to relieve Wu Jing? Escape the shadow of Yuan Shu and take control of Dangyang,
then you can accomplish great things.”
While these two were talking, another man suddenly entered, saying, “I know
what you two are planning, Noble Sirs. Under my hand is a band of one hundred
bold fellows ready to help Sun Ce in whatever he wishes to do.”
The speaker was one of Yuan Shu’s advisers named Lu Fan, from Runan. They
three then sat and discussed schemes.
“The one fear is that Yuan Shu will refuse to give you the troops,” said Lu
Fan.
“I still have the Imperial Hereditary Seal that my father left me: That
should be good security.”
“Yuan Shu earnestly desires that jewel,” said Zhu Zhi. “He will certainly
lend you troops on that pledge.”
The three talked over their plans, gradually settling the details. Not many
days after Sun Ce obtained an interview with his patron.
Assuming the appearance of deep grief Sun Ce said, “I have been unable to
avenge my father. Now the Imperial Protector of Yangzhou, Liu Yao, is opposing
my mother’s brother, and my mother and her family are in danger in Que.
Wherefore I would borrow a few thousands of fighting men to rescue them. As
perhaps, Illustrious Sir, you may lack confidence in me, I am willing to
deposit the Imperial Hereditary Seal, left me by my late father, as a
pledge.”
“Let me see it if you have it,” said Yuan Shu. “I do not want the jewel
really, but you may as well leave it with me. I will lend you three thousand
troops and five hundred horses. Return as soon as peace can be made. As your
rank is hardly sufficient for such powers, I will memorialize to obtain for you
higher rank with the title of General Who Exterminates Brigands, and you can
soon start.”
Sun Ce thanked his patron most humbly and soon put the army in motion, taking
with him his two new advisers and his father’s generals —-Zhu Zhi, Lu Fan,
Cheng Pu, Huang Gai, Han Dang, and others.
When Sun Ce reached Linyang, he saw a body of troops in front of him, at their
head a dashing leader of handsome and refined mien. As soon as this commander
saw Sun Ce, he dismounted and made obeisance. It was Zhou Yu from Shucheng.
When Sun Jian was opposing the tyrant Dong Zhuo, he moved his family to
Shucheng where the Zhou family had lived. And as Zhou Yu and Sun Ce were of the
same age all but two months, they became exceedingly good friends and sworn
brothers, Sun Ce being the elder in virtue of his two months’ seniority. Zhou
Yu was on his way to visit Sun Ce’s uncle, Governor Wu Jing of Dangyang, when
the happy meeting took place.
Naturally Sun Ce confided his projects and inmost ideas to his friend, who at
once said, “I shall put my whole life and energy to serve you to reach that
grand goal.”
“Now that you have come, the design is as good as accomplished,” said Sun
Ce.
Zhou Yu was introduced to Zhu Zhi and Lu Fan.
Zhou Yu said, “Do you know of the two Zhangs of Guangling? They would be most
useful people in working out your schemes.”
“Who are they, the two Zhangs?” said Sun Ce.
“They are men of transcendent genius who are living near here for the sake of
tranquillity in these turbulent times. Their names are Zhang Zhao and Zhang
Hong. Why not invite them to help you, brother?”
Sun Ce lost no time in sending letters and gifts, but they both declined. Then
he visited them in person, was greatly pleased with their speech and by dint of
large gifts and much persuasion, got them to promise to join him. Sun Ce
appointed them both Counselors and Generals.
The plan of the attack upon Yangzhou Region was the next matter for discussion.
The Imperial Protector, Liu Yao, was of Donglai, a scion of the imperial family
and brother of the Imperial Protector of Yanzhou, Liu Dai. Liu Yao had long
ruled in Yangzhou and headquartered in Shouchun. But Yuan Shu had forced him to
flee to the southeast of the Great River. He retired to Que and now was
battling with Wu Jing in Linyang.
Hearing of the meditated attack on him, Liu Yao summoned his generals to take
counsel.
Said General Zhang Ying, “I will take an army and entrench at Niuzhu. No army
can get past that, whatever its strength.”
Zhang Ying was interrupted by another who shouted, “And let me lead the
van!”
All eyes turned to this man. It was Taishi Ci who, after helping Kong Rong
raise the siege of Beihai, had come to serve Liu Yao.
Hearing him offer to undertake the hazardous post of van leader, Liu Yao said,
“But you are still young and not yet equal to such a charge. Rather stay by
my side and await my orders.”
Taishi Ci withdrew in disappointment.
Soon Zhang Ying led his army to Niuzhu, where the stores of grain located. When
Sun Ce approached, Zhang Ying went to meet him, and the two armies faced each
other above the Bullock Rapid. Zhang Ying roundly abused his opponent, and
Huang Gai rode out to attack him. But before the combat had proceeded far,
there arose an alarm of fire in Zhang Ying’s camp. Zhang Ying turned back,
and then Sun Ce advanced in full force, compelling the enemy to abandon their
possession. The defeated general fled to the hills.
Now the incendiaries who had brought about this result were two, named Jiang
Qin from Shouchun and Zhou Tai from Jiujiang, who in these turbulent times had
got together a band of kindred spirits and lived by plundering the country
along the Great River. They knew Sun Ce by reputation as a man who treated able
people very liberally and wished to join him. So they came with their band,
three hundred strong, and helped him in this way as an introduction. Sun Ce
welcomed them and gave the leaders rank. After taking possession of the stores
of all kinds abandoned by the runaways, and enlisting four thousand of those
who surrendered into his own ranks, Sun Ce moved forward to attack Shenting.
After his defeat Zhang Ying returned to his master and told his misfortune. Liu
Yao was going to punish his failure by death, but listened to his advisers, who
asked for mercy for the unfortunate man, and sent him to command the garrison
in Lingling. Liu Yao himself set out to meet the invaders. He camped south of
the Sacred Hills. Sun Ce camped on the opposite side of the hills.
Sun Ce inquired the natives, “Is there a temple of Liu Xiu the Founder of
Latter Han in the vicinity?”
They said, “There is a temple to the south on the summit of the hills.”
“I dreamed last night that Liu Xiu called me, so I will go and pray there,”
said Sun Ce.
But Counselor Zhang Zhao advised, “My lord, you should not go as the enemy is
on the other side, and you may fall into an ambush.”
“The spirit will help me: What need I fear?”
So Sun Ce put on his armor, took his spear and mounted, taking with him twelve
of his commanders as an escort. They rode up the hills, dismounted, burned
incense, and they all bowed in the shrine.
Then Sun Ce knelt and made a vow, saying, “If I, Sun Ce, succeed in my task
and restore the authority of my late father, then will I restore this temple
and order sacrifices at the four seasons.”
When they had remounted, Sun Ce said, “I am going to ride along the ridge and
reconnoiter the enemy’s position.”
His commanders begged him to refrain, but he was obstinate, and they rode there
together, noting the villages below.
A soldier of the other side going along a bye road quickly reported the
presence of horsemen on the ridge, and Liu Yao said, “It is certainly Sun Ce
trying to inveigle us to battle. But do not go out.”
Taishi Ci jumped up, saying, “What better chance to capture him?”
So, without orders he armed himself and rode through the camp, crying, “If
there be any valiant men among you, follow me!”
No one moved save a low-ranking commander who said, “He is a brave man, and I
will go with him.”
So he also went. The others only laughed at the pair.
Now having seen all he wished, Sun Ce thought it time to return and wheeled
round his horse. But when he was going over the summit, someone shouted,
“Stay, Sun Ce!”
Sun Ce turned. Two horsemen were coming at full speed down the next hill. Sun
Ce halted and drew up his little escort right and left, he himself with his
spear ready.
“Which is Sun Ce?” shouted Taishi Ci.
“Who are you?” was the reply.
“I, Taishi Ci of Laihuang, come to take him prisoner!”
“Then I am he!” said Sun Ce, laughing. “Come both of you together. I am
not afraid of you. If I were, I should not be Sun Ce!”
“You and all your crowd come on, and I will not blench!” cried Taishi Ci
putting his horse at a gallop and setting his spear.
Sun Ce braced himself for the shock, and the battle began. Fifty bouts were
fought and still neither combatant had the advantage. Sun Ce’s commanders
whispered to each other their admiration and amazement. Taishi Ci saw that the
spearmanship of his opponent showed no weak point whereby he could gain the
advantage, so he decided to resort to guile. Feigning defeat he would lead Sun
Ce to pursue. Taishi Ci however did not retire along the road by which he had
come, but took a path leading around the hill instead of over it.
His antagonist followed, shouting, “He who retreats is no worthy soldier!”
But Taishi Ci thought within himself, “He has twelve others at his back and I
only one. If I capture him, the others will retake him. I will inveigle him
into some secret spot and then try.”
So flying and fighting by turns he led Sun Ce, an eager pursuer, down to the
plain. Here Taishi Ci suddenly wheeled about and attacked. Again they exchanged
half a hundred bouts, without result. Then Sun Ce made a fierce thrust, which
his opponent evaded by gripping the spear under his arm, while he himself did
the same with his opponent’s spear. Neither was wounded but each exerting his
utmost strength to pull the other out of the saddle, and they both came to the
ground.
Their steeds galloped off they knew not whither, while the two men, each
dropping his spear, began a hand to hand struggle. Soon their fighting robes
were in tatters. Sun Ce gripped the short lance that Taishi Ci carried at his
back, while Taishi Ci tore off Sun Ce’s helmet. Sun Ce tried to stab with the
short lance but Taishi Ci fended off the blow with the helmet as a shield.
Then arose a great shouting. Liu Yao had come up with a thousand soldiers. Sun
Ce seemed now in sore straits. His twelve followers came up, and each combatant
let go his hold. Taishi Ci quickly found another steed, seized a spear, and
mounted. Sun Ce, whose horse had been caught by Cheng Pu, also mounted, and a
confused battle began between the handful of men on one side and a whole
thousand troops on the other. It swayed and drifted down the hill side.
However, soon Zhou Yu leading his troops came to the rescue, and as evening
drew on a tempest put an end to the fight. Both sides drew off and returned to
camp.
Next day Sun Ce led his army to the front of Liu Yao’s camp, and the
challenge was accepted. The armies were drawn up.
Sun Ce hung the short lance he had seized from Taishi Ci at the end of his
spear, waved it in front of the line of battle, and ordered his soldiers to
shout, “If the owner of this had not fled, he would have been stabbed to
death!”
On the other side they hung out Sun Ce’s helmet, and the soldiers shouted
back, “Sun Ce’s head is here already!”
Both sides thus yelled defiance at each other, one side boasting, the other
bragging. Then Taishi Ci rode out challenging Sun Ce to a duel to the death,
and Sun Ce would have accepted.
But Cheng Pu said, “My lord should not trouble himself. I will take him.”
And Cheng Pu rode forth.
“You are no antagonist for me,” said Taishi Ci. “Tell your master to come
out!”
This incensed Cheng Pu, who rode at his opponent, and they two fought thirty
bouts. The duel was stopped by the gongs of Liu Yao.
“Why did you sound the retreat?” said Taishi Ci. “I was just going to
capture the wretch.”
“Because I have just heard that Que has been captured. Zhou Yu led a surprise
force thither, and Chen Wu was in league with him to betray the city. We have
no home now. I will hasten to Moling to get the help of Xue Li and Ze Rong to
retake the city.”
The army retired, Taishi Ci with it, without being pursued.
On the other side Zhang Zhao said to Sun Ce, “Zhou Yu’s attack is the cause
of this move; they are in no mood to fight. A night raid on their camp would
finish them.”
The army was divided into five divisions for the night surprise and hastened
toward the camp where they scored a victory. Their opponents scattered in all
directions. Taishi Ci alone made a determined stand, and as he could not
withstand a whole army, he fled with ten horsemen to Jingxian.
Now Sun Ce acquired a new adherent in the person of Chen Wu. He was a fighter
of seven-span height, sallow of complexion and red eye, an odd looking man. But
Sun Ce held him in high esteem, appointed him Commander, and put him in the van
of the attack on Xue Li. As Van Leader, Chen Wu and a dozen horsemen made a
dash into the enemy’s formation, where they slew half a hundred men. So Xue
Li would not fight but remained within his defenses.
When Sun Ce was attacking the city, a spy came in with the news that Liu Yao
and Ze Rong had gone to attack Niuzhu, which made Sun Ce move thither in haste.
His two opponents were ready for battle.
“I am here!” said Sun Ce, “You had better give in!”
A general came out from behind Liu Yao to accept the challenge. It was Yu Mi.
But in the third bout Sun Ce made him prisoner and carried him off to the other
side. Seeing his colleague thus captured, Fan Neng rode out to the rescue and
got quite close. But just as he was going to thrust, all Sun Ce’s soldiers
shouted, “There is a man behind you going to strike secretly!”
At this Sun Ce turned and shouted so thunderously loud that Fan Neng fell out
of his saddle from mere fright. He split his skull and died. When Sun Ce
reached his standard, he threw his prisoner to the ground. And Yu Mi was also
dead, crushed to death between the arm and the body of his captor. So in a few
moments Sun Ce had disposed of two enemies, one crushed to death and one
frightened to death. Thereafter Sun Ce was called the Young Overlord.
Liu Yao had a defeat. The greater portion of his force surrendered, and the
number of those slain exceeded ten thousand. Liu Yao himself fled to Yuzhang
and sought safety with Liu Biao, Imperial Protector of Jingzhou.
An attack on Moling was the next move. As soon as Sun Ce arrived at the moat,
he summoned Commander Xue Li to surrender. Someone let fly a furtive arrow from
the wall which wounded Sun Ce in the left thigh so severely that he fell from
his steed. Hastily his officers picked up their wounded chief and returned to
the camp where the arrow was pulled out and the wound dressed with the
medicines suitable for injuries by metals.
By Sun Ce’s command the story was spread abroad that the hurt had been fatal,
and all the soldiers set up cries of lamentation. The camp was broken up. Xue
Li, Zhang Ying, and Chen Heng made a night sortie but fell into a carefully
prepared ambush.
Presently Sun Ce himself appeared on horseback, shouting: “Sun Ce is here
still!”
His sudden appearance created such a panic that the soldiers dropped their
weapons and fell on their faces. Sun Ce gave orders not to kill them. But their
leaders fell: Zhang Ying from Chen Wu’s spear thrust as he turned to run
away; Chen Heng was killed by Jiang Qin’s arrow; and Commander Xue Li was
slain in the turbulence. Thus Sun Ce got possession of Moling. Having calmed
the people, he sent his soldiers away to Jingxian, where Taishi Ci was in
command.
Taishi Ci had assembled two thousand recruits in addition to his own troops for
the purpose of avenging his master. Sun Ce and Zhou Yu on the other hand
consulted how to capture him alive.
Zhou Yu planned, “Attack the city on three sides, leaving the east gate free
for flight. Some distance off an ambush shall be prepared, when Taishi Ci, his
men fatigued and horses spent, shall fall an easy victim.”
The latest recruits under Taishi Ci’s banner were mostly hillmen and
unaccustomed to discipline. Beside, the walls of the city were pitiably low.
One night Sun Ce ordered Chen Wu to strip off his long dress, leave his arms
save a dagger, clamber up the ramparts, and set fire to the city. Seeing the
flames spreading, Taishi Ci made for the east gate and, as soon as he got
outside, Sun Ce followed in pursuit. The pursuit was maintained for some
fifteen miles when the pursuers stopped.
Taishi Ci went on as long as possible, finally halting to rest in a spot
surrounded by reeds. Suddenly a tremendous shouting arose. Taishi Ci was just
starting when tripping ropes arose all round, his horse was thrown and he found
himself a prisoner.
Taishi Ci was taken back to camp. As soon as Sun Ce heard the news, he himself
rode out to order the guards to leave the prisoner, whose bonds he loosened
with his own hands. Then he took off his own embroidered robe and put it on the
captive. They entered the camp together.
“I knew you were a real hero,” said Sun Ce. “That worm Liu Yao had no use
for such as you, and so he got beaten.”
Taishi Ci, overcome by this kindness and good treatment, then formally
surrendered.
Sun Ce seized his hand and said, laughing, “If you had taken me at that fight
we had near the shrine, would you have killed me?”
“Who can say?” said Taishi Ci smiling.
Sun Ce laughed also and they entered his tent, where Taishi Ci was placed in
the seat of honor at a banquet.
Taishi Ci said, “Can you trust me so far as to let me go to muster as many as
I can of the soldiers of my late master? Under the smart of this defeat they
will turn against him, and they would be a great help to you.”
“Exactly what I most desire. I will make an agreement with you that at midday
tomorrow you will return.”
Taishi Ci agreed and went off. All the generals said he would never return.
“He is trustworthy and will not break his word,” said the chief.
None of the officers believed he would come back. But the next day they set up
a bamboo rod in the gate of the camp, and just as the shadow marked noon Taishi
Ci returned, bringing with him about a thousand troops. Sun Ce was pleased, and
his officers had to confess that he had rightly judged his man.
Sun Ce thus marched his army to the South Land, and his enemies fled or
surrendered before his force. He had now several legions and the southeast of
the Great River was his. He improved the conditions of the people and
maintained order so that his adherents and supporters daily increased. He was
called Sun Ce the Bright.
When Sun Ce’s army approached, the people used to flee in terror; but when it
had arrived and they saw that no one was permitted to loot and not the least
attempt was made on their houses, they rejoiced and presented the soldiers with
oxen and wine, for which they were in turn duly rewarded. Gladness filled the
country side. The soldiers who had followed Liu Yao were kindly treated. Those
who wished to join Sun Ce’s army did so; those who preferred not to be
soldiers were sent home with presents. And thus Sun Ce won the respect and
praise of everyone and became very powerful.
Sun Ce then settled his mother and the remainder of the family in Que, setting
his brother, Sun Quan, and Zhou Tai over the city of Xuancheng. Then he headed
an expedition to the south to reduce Wujun.
At that time there was a certain Yan Baihu, or the White Tiger, who styled
himself King of East Wu and ruled over Wujun. His armies stationed at Wucheng
and Jiaxing. Hearing of Sun Ce’s approach, Yan Baihu sent his brother, Yan
Yu, with an army against Sun Ce, and they met at Maple Bridge.
Yan Yu, sword in hand, took his stand on the bridge, and this was reported to
Sun Ce, who prepared to accept the challenge.
Zhang Hong tried to dissuade him, saying, “For as much as my lord’s fate is
bound up with that of the army, he should not risk a conflict with a mere
robber. I wish that you should remember your own value.”
“Your words, O Wise One, are as gold and precious stones, but I fear that my
soldiers will not carry out my commands unless I myself share their dangers.”
However, Sun Ce sent forth Han Dang to take up the challenge. Just as Han Dang
reached the bridge, Jiang Qin and Chen Wu, who had dropped down the river in a
small boat, passed under the bridge. Though the arrows fell in clouds on the
bank, the two men rushed up and fiercely attacked Yan Yu as he stood on the
bridge. Yan Yu fled and Han Dang went in pursuit. But Yan Yu smote up to the
west gate of the city into which he entered.
Sun Ce laid siege to Wujun both by land and water. For three days no one came
out to offer battle. Then at the head of his army, Sun Ce came to the west gate
and summoned the warden. An officer of inconsiderable rank came out and stood
with one hand resting on a beam while with the other he gave point to his abuse
of those below. Quickly Taishi Ci’s hands sought his bow and an arrow was on
the string.
“See me hit that fellow’s hand,” said he, turning to his companions.
Even as the sound of his voice died away, the bowstring twanged, the arrow sped
and lodged in the beam, firmly pinning thereto the officer’s hand. Both
sides, those on the wall and those below it, marveled and acclaimed at such
marksmanship.
The wounded man was taken away.
When Yan Baihu the White Tiger heard of the exploit, he said, “How can we
hope to withstand an army with such leaders as this in it?”
And his thoughts turned toward a peace. He sent his brother Yan Yu out to see
Sun Ce, who received him civilly, invited him into the tent, and set wine
before him.
“And what does your brother propose?” said Sun Ce.
“He is willing to share this region with you,” was the reply.
“The rat! How dare he put himself on a level with me?” cried Sun Ce.
Sun Ce commanded to put the messenger to death. Yan Yu started up and drew his
sword; but out flew Sun Ce’s blade, and the unhappy messenger fell to the
ground. His head was hacked off and sent into the city to his brother.
This had its effect. Yan Baihu saw resistance was hopeless, so he abandoned
Wujun and fled. Sun Ce pressed the attack. Huang Gai captured Jiaxing, and
Taishi Ci took Wucheng. Several other southern cities were fallen. The
territory was quickly subdued. Yan Baihu rushed off toward Yuhang in the east,
plundering on all sides, till a band of villagers under the leadership of one
Ling Cao checked his career of robbery there. Yan Baihu then fled toward
Kuaiji.
Ling Cao and his son then went to meet Sun Ce, who took them into his service,
and appointed them Commanders as a reward for their service, and the joint
forces crossed the Great River.
The White Tiger, Yan Baihu, gathered his scattered forces and took up a
position at Western Ford, but Cheng Pu attacked him there and scattered the
defenders, chasing them as far as Kuaiji. The Governor of the place, Wang Lang,
was on Yan Baihu’s side and inclined to support him actively.
But, when Wang Lang proposed this, one of his officers stood forth, saying,
“No! No! Sun Ce as a leader is humane and upright, while the White Tiger is a
savage ruffian. Rather capture him and offer his person as a peace offering to
Sun Ce.”
The Governor turned angrily toward the speaker, who was an official named Yu
Fan from Kuaiji, and bade him be silent. Yu Fan withdrew sighing deeply. And
the Governor went to the help of the White Tiger with whom he joined forces at
Shanyin.
Sun Ce came up. When both sides were arrayed, Sun Ce rode out and addressed
Wang Lang, saying, “Mine is an army of good soldiers, and my aim is to
restore peace to this region, but you give your support to a rebel!”
Wang Lang replied, “Your greed is insatiable. Having got possession of Wujun,
you want also my territory. I shall revenge for the Yans!”
This response greatly angered Sun Ce. Just as battle was to be joined, Taishi
Ci advanced and Wang Lang came toward him waving a sword. Before they had
exchanged many passes, Zhou Xin dashed out to help Wang Lang. Thereupon Huang
Gai rode out to make the sides more equal. These latter two were just engaging
when the drums rolled on both sides, and a general battle began.
Suddenly confusion was caused in the rear of Wang Lang’s army by the sudden
onslaught of a small army. Wang Lang galloped off to see the attackers were
Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu. Then an attack was made on his flank, so that he was in a
hopeless position, and he and Yan Baihu and Zhou Xin, fighting desperately to
cut an alley out, only just managed to reach the shelter of the city. The
drawbridges were raised, the gates closed, and preparations made to sustain a
siege.
Sun Ce followed right up to the walls and then divided his troops so as to
attack all four gates. Seeing that the city was being fiercely attacked, Wang
Lang was for making a sortie, but Yan Baihu opposed this as hopeless against so
strong a force outside.
“We can only strengthen our position and remain behind the shelter of the
ramparts until hunger forces the besiegers to retire,” said Yan Baihu.
Wang Lang agreed, and the siege went on. For several days a vigorous attack was
maintained, but with little success.
In a council, Sun Jing, who was the uncle of Sun Ce, said, “Since they are
holding the city with such resolution, it will be difficult to dislodge them.
But the bulk of their supplies is stored at Chadu, distant only some ten miles.
Our best plan is to seize this place, thus attacking where the enemy is
unprepared, and doing what they do not expect.”
Sun Ce approved, saying, “My uncle’s plan is admirable and will crush the
rebels.”
So he issued orders to kindle watch fires at all the gates, and leave the flags
standing to maintain the appearance of soldiers in position while the
expedition went south.
Zhou Yu came to utter a warning, “When you, my lord, go away, the besieged
will surely come out and follow you. We might prepare a surprise for them.”
Sun Ce replied, “My preparations are complete, and the city will be captured
tonight.”
So the army set out. Wang Lang heard that the besiegers had gone, and he went
up to the tower to reconnoiter. He saw the fires blazing, the smoke rising, and
the pennons fluttering in the breeze as usual and hesitated.
Zhou Xin said, “He has gone and this is only a strategy. Let us go out and
smite them.”
Yan Baihu said, “If he has gone, it is to attack Chadu. Let us pursue.”
“The place is our base of supply,” said Wang Lang, “and must be defended.
You two lead the way, and I will follow with reserves.”
So Yan Baihu and Zhou Xin went forth with five thousand soldiers and drew near
their enemy about the first watch, at seven miles from the city. The road led
through dense forest. Then suddenly the drums beat and lighted torches sprang
up on all sides. Yan Baihu was frightened, turned his horse and started to
retreat. At once a leader appeared in front in whom, by the glare of the
torches, he recognized Sun Ce. Zhou Xin made a rush at him but fell under Sun
Ce’s spear. The men surrendered. However, Yan Baihu managed to cut his way
out and fled to Yuhang.
Wang Lang soon heard of the loss and, not daring to return to the city, fled in
all haste to the coastal regions. And so Sun Ce got possession of the city of
Kuaiji.
Having restored order, a few days later a man came bringing the head of the
White Tiger as an offering to Sun Ce. This man was a native of the county. He
was of eight-span height, with a square face and wide mouth. He was named Dong
Xi. Sun Ce appointed him Commander. After this, peace reigned in all the
southeast. Sun Ce placed his uncle Sun Jing in command of the city and made Zhu
Zhi Governor of Wujun. Then Sun Ce returned to his own place, south of the
Great River.
While Sun Ce was absent, a band of brigands suddenly attacked Xuancheng, left
in the care of his brother Sun Quan and the leader Zhou Tai. As the onslaught
was made on all sides at once, and in the night, the brigands got the upper
hand. Zhou Tai took the youth in his arms and mounted a horse; but when the
robbers came on with swords to attack him, he dismounted, and though without
mail, met the robbers on foot and slew them as they came up. Then came a
horseman armed with a spear, but Zhou Tai laid hold of his spear and pulled him
to the earth. Next Zhou Tai mounted the robber’s horse, and thrusting this
way and that with the spear fought his way out. So Sun Quan was preserved, but
his savior had received more than a dozen wounds. However, the bandits went
away.
These wounds being due to metal would not heal but swelled enormously, and the
brave soldier’s life hung in the balance. Sun Ce returned and was deeply
grieved.
Then Dong Xi said, “Once in an engagement with some coastal pirates, I
received many spear wounds, but a certain wise man named Yu Fan recommended a
surgeon who cured me in half a month.”
“Surely this must be Yu Fan of Kuaiji,” replied Sun Ce. “That is he; he
is so called.”
“Yes, truly a wise man. I would employ him.”
So Sun Ce sent two officers to invite Yu Fan, and he came at once. He was
treated in most friendly fashion and appointed an official forthwith. Then the
question of treating the wounded man was brought up.
“The surgeon is one Hua Tuo from Qiao, who has perfectly marvelous medicine
skill. I will get him to come,” said Yu Fan.
Shortly the famous Hua Tuo arrived, a man with the complexion of a youth and a
snowy beard. He looked more like a saint who had passed the gates of this life.
He was treated very warmly and taken to see the sick general’s wounds.
“The case is not difficult,” said the surgeon.
And he prepared certain drugs that healed the wounds within a month. Sun Ce
suitably acknowledged his care and skill, and he was allowed to leave with rich
rewards.
Next Sun Ce attacked the brigands and destroyed them, so restoring complete
tranquillity to the South Land. After this he set garrisons at all the
strategic points in the old state of Wu, and this done, memorialized what he
had achieved to the Throne. He came to an understanding with Cao Cao and sent
letters to Yuan Shu demanding the return of the Imperial Hereditary Seal he had
left in pledge.
But Yuan Shu, secretly cherishing the most ambitious designs, wrote excuses and
did not return the state jewel. In his own place Yuan Shu hastily summoned
about thirty of his officers to a council. Among them were Adviser Yang Dajiang
and Generals Zhang Xun, Ji Ling, Qiao Rui, Lei Bo, and Chen Lan.
Yuan Shu said, “Sun Ce borrowed an army from me and set out on an expedition
which has made him master of the South Land. Now he says nothing of repayment
but demands the token of his pledge. Truly he is a boor, and what steps can I
take to destroy him?”
Yang Dajiang replied, “You cannot do any thing against him, for he is too
strongly placed, the Great River as the shield. You must first remove Liu Bei
in revenge for having attacked you without cause, and then you may think about
Sun Ce. I have a scheme to put the former into your hands in a very short
time.”
Yuan Shu went not to destroy the tiger, but instead
Against a dragon forth his army led.
The means Yang Dajiang employed will be made plain in the next chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 16 ****
Adviser Yang Dajiang knew how to remove Liu Bei.
“What is your plan of attack on Liu Bei?” said Yuan Shu.
Yang Dajiang replied, “Though Liu Bei, now camped at Xiaopei, could easily be
taken, yet Lu Bu is strongly posted at the chief city near. And I think Lu Bu
would help Liu Bei if it was only for the grudge he bears against you for not
having given him the gold and studs, grain and horses you promised. First of
all you should send Lu Bu a present whereby to engage his affections and keep
him quiet while you deal with Liu Bei. You can see to Lu Bu after this is done,
and Xuzhou is yours.”
Thereupon two hundred thousand carts of millet was sent, with letters, by the
hand of Han Yin. The gift pleased Lu Bu greatly, and he treated the messenger
with great cordiality. Feeling sure of no trouble from that quarter, Yuan Shu
told off one hundred thousand troops against Xiaopei. The army was led by Ji
Ling as commanding general, and Lei Bo and Chen Lan as generals.
When Liu Bei heard these things he called his officers to take counsel. Zhang
Fei was for open war forthwith.
But Sun Qian said, “Our resources were too small; therefore, we must lay the
position before Lu Bu and ask help.”
“Do you think that fellow will do anything?” said Zhang Fei cynically.
Liu Bei decided in favor of Sun Qian’s proposal and wrote as follows:
“Humbly I venture to remind you that I am here by your orders and enjoy
repose as the result of your kindness, extensive as the heavens. Now Yuan Shu,
moved by a desire for revenge, is sending a force against this place, and its
destruction is imminent unless you intervene to save it. I trust you will send
an army quickly to protect the town, and our happiness will be
inexpressible.”
Receiving this Lu Bu called in Chen Gong to whom he said, “I have just
received gifts from Yuan Shu and a letter, with the intent of restraining me
from helping Liu Bei. Now comes a letter from Liu Bei asking help. It seems to
me that Liu Bei where he is can do me no harm; but if Yuan Shu overcomes Liu
Bei and comes to an understanding with the leaders around the Huashan
Mountains, then the power of the north is so much nearer, and I should be
unable to resist the attacks of so many leaders and should never sleep secure.
I will aid Liu Bei: That is the better course for me.”
Now Yuan Shu’s force sent against Xiaopei went thither as quickly as
possible, and soon the country to the southeast fluttered with pennons by day
and blazed with watch fires by night, while the rolling of the drums
reverberated from heaven to earth.
The five thousand troops at Liu Bei’s disposal were led out of the city and
arranged to make a brave show, but it was good news to him to hear that Lu Bu
had arrived and was quite near. Lu Bu camped only half a mile away to the
southwest. When Yuan Shu’s general, Ji Ling, heard of his arrival, he wrote
letters reproaching Lu Bu for his treachery. Lu Bu smiled as he read them.
“I know how to make both of them love me,” said Lu Bu.
So he sent invitations to both Liu Bei and Ji Ling to come to a banquet.
Liu Bei was for accepting the invitation and going, but his brothers dissuaded
him, saying, “There is some treachery in his heart.”
“I have treated him too well for him to do me any harm,” said Liu Bei.
So he mounted and rode away, the two brothers following. They came to the camp.
The host said, “Now by a special effort I have got you out of danger. I hope
you will not forget that when you come into your own.”
Liu Bei thanked him heartily and was invited to take a seat. Guan Yu and Zhang
Fei took up their usual place as guards.
But when Ji Ling was announced, Liu Bei felt a spasm of fear and got up to go
away.
“You two are invited for the particular purpose of a discussion,” said the
host. “Do not take it amiss.”
Liu Bei, being quite ignorant of his intentions, was very uneasy. Presently his
fellow guest entered. Seeing Liu Bei in the tent, and in the seat of honor, Ji
Ling was puzzled, hesitated and tried to withdraw. But the attendants prevented
this and Lu Bu, advancing, laid hold of him and drew him into the tent as if he
had been a child.
“Do you wish to slay me?” asked Ji Ling.
“Not at all,” replied Lu Bu.
“Then you are going to slay Long-Ears?”
“No, not that.”
“Then what does it mean?”
“Liu Bei and I are brothers. Now, General, you are besieging him, and so I
have come to the rescue.”
“Then slay me,” said Ji Ling.
“There would be no sense in that. All my life I have disliked fighting and
quarrels, but have loved making peace. And now I want to settle the quarrel
between you two.”
“May I ask how you think of doing so?”
“I have a means and one approved of Heaven itself.”
Then Lu Bu drew Ji Ling within the tent and led him up to Liu Bei. The two men
faced each other, full of mutual suspicion, but their host placed himself
between them and they took their seats, Liu Bei on the right hand of the host.
The banquet began. After a number of courses almost in silence, Lu Bu spoke,
saying, “I wish you two gentlemen to listen to me and put an end to your
strife.”
Liu Bei made no reply, but Ji Ling said, “I have come with an army of one
hundred thousand at the express bidding of my master to take Liu Bei. How can I
cease the strife? I must fight.”
“What!” exclaimed Zhang Fei drawing his sword. “Few as we are, we regard
you no more than a lot of children. What are you compared with a million Yellow
Scarves? You dare hurt our brother!”
Guan Yu urged him to be silent, saying, “Let us see what General Lu Bu has to
say first. After that there will be time to go to our tents and fight.”
“I beg you both to come to an understanding. I cannot let you fight,” said
Lu Bu.
Now on one side Ji Ling was discontented and angry; on the other Zhang Fei was
dying for a fight; and neither of the two chiefly concerned would signify
assent.
Then suddenly the host turned to his attendants, saying, “Bring my trident
halberd!”
They did so, and he sat there gripping that graceful but effective weapon in
his right hand. Both guests felt very ill at ease and turned pale.
Lu Bu went on, saying, “I have tried to persuade you to make peace, for that
is the command of the Most High. It shall be put to the test.”
He then bade his servants take the halberd outside beyond the gate and set it
up.
Then speaking to his two guests, he said, “That gate is one hundred and fifty
paces distant. If I can hit that left branch of the halberd-head with an arrow,
you will both withdraw your armies. If I miss, you can go away and prepare for
immediate battle. I shall stand against either of you who does not abide by
what I say.”
Ji Ling thought to himself, “That small mark at that distance! How could
anyone hit it?”
So he assented, thinking he would have plenty of fighting after his host had
missed the mark. Of course Liu Bei was willing.
They all sat down again and wine was served. When this had been drunk, the host
called for his bow and arrows. Liu Bei silently prayed that Lu Bu would hit the
mark.
Lu Bu turned back his sleeves, carefully fitted an arrow to the string and
pulled the bow to its utmost stretch. A slight exclamation escaped him as the
bow curved like the harvest moon sailing through the sky. “Twang!” went the
bowstring, and the arrow sped like a falling star. And it struck the slender
tongue of the halberd head full and square. A roar of acclamation from all
sides greeted the exploit.
The multitude people often hail their praise:
O Lu Bu was a wonderful archer,
And the arrow he shot sped straight;
By hitting the mark he saved his friend
That day at his camp gate.
Hou Yi, the archer of ancient days,
Brought down each mocking sun,
And the apes that gibbered to fright Yang Youji
Were slain by him, one by one.
But we sing of Lu Bu that drew the bow,
And his feathered shaft that flew;
For one hundred thousand soldiers could doff their mails
When he hit the mark so true.
Lu Bu laughed loud at the success of his shot.
Dropping his bow he seized his guests by the hands, saying, “The command of
Heaven indeed! And now you cease from fighting!”
He ordered the soldier attendants to pour out great goblets of wine and each
drank. Liu Bei in his inmost heart felt rather lucky; his fellow guest sat
silent, nodding his head.
Presently Ji Ling said, “I cannot disobey your command, General, but let me
depart. What will my master say and will he believe me?”
“I will write a letter and confirm it,” said Lu Bu.
After a few more rounds of the wine, Ji Ling asked that he might have the
letter and after that departed.
When the brothers took their leave, Lu Bu again reminded Liu Bei, saying, “Do
not forget I have delivered you today!”
Liu Bei thanked him and departed. Next day the leaders broke camps, and the
soldiers were gone.
When Ji Ling had got back to the South of River Huai and told the story of the
feat of archery and the peace making that followed, and had presented the
letter, his lord was very wroth.
“Lu Bu repays me for all my grain with this bit of play acting!” cried Yuan
Shu. “He has saved Liu Bei, but I will lead a large army myself and settle
both Liu Bei and him.”
“Be careful, my lord,” said Ji Ling. “Lu Bu is braver and stronger than
most leaders and has a wide territory. He and Liu Bei together make a powerful
combination, not easy to break. But there is another course. I have found out
that his wife, Lady Yan, has a daughter just of marriageable age; and as you
have a son, you could arrange a marriage alliance with Lu Bu. If his daughter
wedded your son, Lu Bu would certainly slay your enemy for you. This is called
‘Relative-above-Stranger’ plan.”
This scheme appealed to Yuan Shu, who soon set about its accomplishment. He
sent presents by the hand of Han Yin, who was to discuss the question.
When Han Yin saw Lu Bu, he said, “My master has an immense respect for you,
Illustrious Sir, and he desires to ensure perpetual alliance between the two
families by a marriage, an alliance such as existed between the ancient states
of Qin and Jin.”
Lu Bu was well disposed toward the scheme, but went in to consult his wife. Now
Lu Bu had two wives and one concubine. He first married a lady of the Yan
family, and she was the legal wife. Then he took Diao Chan as a concubine. And
while he was living at Xiaopei, he had married a secondary wife, a daughter of
Cao Bao. Lady Cao had died quite young leaving no issue. Neither had Diao Chan
borne any children. So that Lu Bu had but one child, this daughter, of whom he
was dotingly fond.
When he broached the subject, his wife said, “The Yuans have dominated the
regions around the River Huai these many years. They have a large army and are
very prosperous. One day a Yuan will become emperor, and our daughter may hope
to be an empress. But how many sons has Yuan Shu?”
“Only this one.”
“Then we should accept the offer. Even if our daughter does not become
Empress, Xuzhou has a new ally.”
Lu Bu decided to accept and so treated the messenger with extreme generosity.
Han Yin went back with a favorable answer. The wedding gifts were then prepared
ready for Han Yin to take to the bride’s family. They were received and
banquets and merry-making filled all the time.
Next day Chen Gong went to see the messenger in his lodging, and when the usual
ceremonies and greetings had been exchanged, the two men sat down to talk.
When the servants had been sent out of earshot, Chen Gong said, “Who
originated this scheme by which Yuan Shu and Lu Bu are to become connections by
this marriage so that Liu Bei’s head may fall?”
Han Yin was terrified. “I pray you not to let it get abroad,” said he.
“I certainly shall keep it secret. But if there be any delay, some other
person will find it out and that spells failure,” said Chen Gong.
“What would best be done?”
“I will see Lu Bu and get him to send the girl immediately so that the
marriage may be concluded quickly.”
“If it happened thus, my master would indeed hold you in high respect.”
With this Chen Gong took his leave and sought an interview with Lu Bu.
“I hear your daughter is to be married to Yuan Shu’s son. That is capital,
but no one knows when.”
“That has yet to be considered,” said Lu Bu.
“There were certain fixed rules as to the period between sending presents and
consummation of the marriage: Emperors, a year; nobles, half a year; high
officers, three months; and common people, one month.”
Lu Bu replied, “As to Yuan Shu, Heaven has already put into his hands the
Imperial Hereditary Seal, and he will surely arrive at the dignity one day. So,
I should think the imperial rule would apply.”
“No, it will not.”
“The nobles’ rule, then?”
“No, nor that.”
“The high officers’?”
“Not even that.”
Lu Bu laughed, saying, “Then you mean me to go by the rule for common
people.”
“Nor that either.”
“Then what do you mean?”
Chen Gong said, “In the midst of the present troubles, when there is great
rivalry among the nobles, do you not see that the others will be exceedingly
jealous of your marriage alliance with such a high family as the Yuans? Suppose
you postpone the choice of the day, most likely when your fine morning arrives,
the wedding party will fall into an ambush on the road and the bride be carried
off. Then what could be done? My opinion is that you would have done better to
refuse. But since you have consented, then carry out the plan at once before
the lords hear of it, and so send the girl over without delay to Shouchun. You
can hire a lodging there till you have selected the wedding day, and the odds
are greatly against any failure.”
“What you say is quite to the point,” replied Lu Bu.
He went into the private apartments to see his wife and told her the bride
elect would set out immediately and the trousseau was to be prepared as far as
it could be. On his side he chose some good horses and had a wedding carriage
got ready. The escort consisted of Han Yin and two of Lu Bu’s generals, Song
Xian and Wei Xu. The procession went out of the city to the sound of music.
Now at this time Chen Gui, father of Chen Deng, was placidly waiting till the
evening of his life passed into night. Hearing this burst of music he inquired
the occasion, and the servants told him.
“They are working on the ‘Relative-above-Stranger’ device, then,” said
Chen Gui. “Liu Bei is in danger.”
Thereupon in spite of his many infirmities, he went to see Lu Bu.
“Noble Sir, what brings you here?” asked Lu Bu.
“I heard you were dead, and I came to mourn,” quavered the old man.
“Who said that?” exclaimed his host.
“Once upon a time you received grand presents from Yuan Shu that you might
slay Liu Bei, but you got out by that clever shot at your halberd. Now they
suddenly seek a marriage alliance thinking to get hold of your daughter as a
pledge. The next move will be an attack on Xiaopei and, that gone, where are
you? Whatever they ask in future, grain or troops or anything else, and you
yield, will bring your own end nearer, and make you hated all round. If you
refuse, then you are false to the duties of a relative, and that will be an
excuse to attack you openly. Beside this Yuan Shu intends to call himself
emperor, which would be rebellion, and you would be of the rebel’s family:
Something abominable, which the multitude people would not suffer.”
Lu Bu was much disturbed to hear this.
“I have been misled by Chen Gong!” cried he.
So he hurriedly sent Zhang Liao to bring the wedding party, which had been ten
miles away, back to the city. When they had come, Lu Bu threw Han Yin into
prison and sent a reply to Yuan Shu saying curtly that the girl’s trousseau
was not ready and she could not be married till it was.
Chen Gui wanted Han Yin to be sent to Capital Xuchang. But Lu Bu was hesitating
what course to adopt, when he heard that Liu Bei was enlisting soldiers and
buying horses for no apparent reason.
“He is simply doing his duty. There is nothing to be surprised at,” said Lu
Bu at first.
Then came two officers, Song Xian and Wei Xu, saying, “As you ordered us, we
went into the Huashan Mountains to purchase horses. We had got three hundred
when, on our way back, on the borders of Xiaopei some robbers stole half of
them. We hear that the real robbers were Zhang Fei and his soldiers, who took
on the guise of brigands.”
Lu Bu was very angry at this and began to prepare an expedition against
Xiaopei. When Liu Bei heard that an attack threatened, he led out his army to
oppose it, and the two armies were arrayed.
Liu Bei rode to the front and said, “Elder brother, why have you brought an
army against me?”
Lu Bu began abusing him, saying, “That shot of mine at the Archery Feast
saved you from grave danger. Why then did you steal my horses?”
“I wanted horses and I sent out to buy them. Should I dare to take yours?”
said Liu Bei.
“You stole a hundred and fifty in the person of your brother Zhang Fei. You
only used another man’s hand.”
Thereupon Zhang Fei, with his spear set, rode out, saying, “Yes! I stole your
good horses, and what more do you expect?”
Lu Bu replied, “You goggled-eyed thief! You are always treating me with
contempt!”
“Yes! I took your horses and you get angry. You did not say any thing when
you stole my brother’s Xuzhou!”
Lu Bu rode forward to give battle, and Zhang Fei advanced. A reckless fight
began, and the two warriors kept it up for a hundred bouts without a decisive
stroke. Then Liu Bei, fearing some accident to his brother, hastily beat the
gongs as a signal to retire and led his army into the city. Lu Bu then invested
it.
Liu Bei called his brother and chided him as the cause of all this misfortune.
“Where are the horses?” said Liu Bei.
“In some of the temples and courts,” replied Zhang Fei.
Liu Bei sent a messenger out to speak softly and offer to restore the stolen
horses if hostilities were to cease. Lu Bu was disposed to agree but Chen Gong
opposed.
“You will suffer by and by if you do not remove this Liu Bei.”
Under Chen Gong’s influence the request for peace was rejected, and the
attackers on the city pressed harder.
Liu Bei called Mi Zhu and Sun Qian to him to ask advice.
Said Sun Qian, “The one person that Cao Cao detests is Lu Bu. Let us then
abandon the city and take refuge with Cao Cao, from whom we may borrow troops
to destroy him.”
“If we try to get away, who will lead the van?”
“I will do my best,” said Zhang Fei.
So Zhang Fei led the way; Guan Yu was rearguard; and in the center was Liu Bei
with the non-fighting portion. The cavalcade started and went out at the north
gate under the bright moon. They met opposition from Song Xian and Wei Xu’s
men, but the soldiers were driven off by Zhang Fei, and the besieging force was
passed without difficulty. Zhang Liao pursued, but was held off by Guan Yu’s
rearguard. It seemed Lu Bu was not dissatisfied at the flight, for he took no
personal trouble to prevent it. He made formal entry into the city, settled
local affairs, and appointed Gao Shun as Governor.
Liu Bei approached Xuchang and encamped outside the city, whence he sent Sun
Qian to see Cao Cao and relate the events that brought him there.
Cao Cao was very friendly and said, “Liu Bei is as my brother.”
Then Cao Cao invited Liu Bei to enter the city.
Leaving his brothers at the camp, Liu Bei, with Sun Qian and Mi Zhu, went to
Cao Cao, who received him with the greatest respect. The story of Lu Bu’s
perfidy was again related.
“He has no sense of right,” said Cao Cao. “You and I, my brother, will
attack him together.”
Liu Bei was very grateful. A banquet was then prepared, and it was late evening
before the visitor left for his own camp.
Xun Yu then had an interview with his master and said, “If you are not on
your guard, Liu Bei will be your undoing. You ought to destroy him. He is too
much of a hero.”
Cao Cao made no reply and his adviser retired.
Presently Guo Jia came, and Cao Cao said, “I have been advised to kill Liu
Bei: What of such a scheme?”
“A bad scheme,” said Guo Jia. “You are the popular champion, pledged to
relieve the people from oppression, and only by truth and rectitude can you
secure the support of the noble-minded. Your only fear is lest they stay away.
Now Liu Bei is a clear hero. He has come to you for help and protection, and to
put him to death would be to alienate all good people and put fear into the
hearts of all the able advisers. Hampered by these difficulties, where will you
find those whose help you need? To remove the dangers represented by one man
and thereby injure yourself in the eyes of all humankind is a sure means of
destruction. These conditions need careful consideration.”
“What you say exactly fits in with what I think,” said Cao Cao, greatly
pleased with these remarks.
His next step was to memorialize the Emperor to give Liu Bei the imperial
protectorship of Yuzhou.
Again Cheng Yu said, “Liu Bei is certain to rise to the top. He will never
remain in a subordinate position. You had better remove him.”
Cao Cao answered, “Now is just the time to make use of good people. I will
not forfeit the regard of the world for the sake of removing one individual.
Guo Jia and I both see this in the same light.”
Wherefore Cao Cao rejected all persuasion to work against Liu Bei but sent him
three thousand soldiers and ten thousand carts of grain, and set him on his way
to Yuzhou. Liu Bei was to march to Xiaopei, occupy it, call together his former
soldiers, and attack Lu Bu.
When Liu Bei reached Yuzhou, he sent to inform Cao Cao, who prepared to march
an army to subjugate Lu Bu. But just then hasty news came that Zhang Ji, who
had gone to the attack of Nanyang, had been wounded by a stray arrow and had
died. His nephew, Zhang Xiu, had succeeded to the command of his army; and with
Jia Xu as strategist, Zhang Xiu had joined Liu Biao and camped at Wancheng.
They intended to attack the capital and get possession of the Emperor’s
person.
Cao Cao was placed in a quandary. He would go to attack this combination, but
he feared lest Lu Bu would attack the capital if he left it. So he sought the
advice of Xun Yu.
Said the Adviser, “Lu Bu has no notion of a policy. He is led astray by any
little advantage that presents itself to his eyes. All you need do is to obtain
promotion for him, giving him some additional title, and tell him to make peace
with Liu Bei, and he will do it. Lu Bu is no threat then.”
“Good,” said Cao Cao.
And he acted upon the hint and sent an Imperial Legate, Wang Ze, to Xuzhou with
the official announcement and a letter urging peace, while he went on with
preparations to meet the other danger from Zhang Xiu.
When ready Cao Cao marched out with one hundred fifty thousand troops in three
divisions. Xiahou Dun was the Van Leader, and they went to River Yu and camped
there.
Jia Xu succeeded in persuading Zhang Xiu of the hopelessness of resistance.
“You would do well to surrender, since Cao Cao’s army is too large for you
to oppose,” said Jia Xu.
Seeing the truth of this, Zhang Xiu sent his adviser to propose sub mission.
Cao Cao was greatly pleased with the messenger, admiring his ready and fluent
repartee, and tried to win him to his service.
“I was formerly with Li Jue and was guilty with him. Now I am with Zhang Xiu
who esteems my advice, and I should not like to abandon him,” said Jia Xu.
Jia Xu left and next day conducted his master into Cao Cao’s presence. Cao
Cao was very generous. Then he entered Wancheng with a small force, the greater
part of the army being put in camp outside where the lines extended some three
miles. Great banquets were given every day by Zhang Xiu, and Cao Cao was always
being entertained.
One day, when Cao Cao returned to his quarters in a more than usual merry mood,
he asked the attendants, “Are there singing girls in the city?”
His nephew, Cao Amin, heard the question and said, “Peeping through one of
the partitions last evening, I saw a perfectly beautiful woman in one of the
courts. They told me she was the wife of Zhang Ji, Zhang Xiu’s uncle. She is
very lovely.”
Cao Cao, inflamed by the description given him of the beauty, told his nephew
to go and bring her to visit him. Cao Amin did so, supported by an armed
escort, and very soon the woman stood before Cao Cao.
She was a beauty indeed, and Cao Cao asked her name.
She replied, “Thy handmaid was wife to Zhang Ji; I was born of the Zhou
family.”
“Do you know who I am?”
“I have known the Prime Minister by reputation a long time. I am happy to see
him and be permitted to bow before him,” said she.
“It was for your sake that I allowed Zhang Xiu to submit; otherwise I would
have slain him and cut him off root and branch,” said Cao Cao.
“Indeed, then, I owe my very life to you; I am very grateful,” said she.
“To see you is a glimpse of paradise, but there is one thing I should like
better. I hope, this night, we can share the same pillow together, and tomorrow
go with me to the capital where we can enjoy all the luxuries of life. What do
you say to that, my lady?”
She could but thank him.
“But Zhang Xiu will greatly wonder at my prolonged absence, and gossips will
begin to talk,” said she.
“If you like, you can leave the city tomorrow.”
She did so; but instead of going at once to the capital, she stayed with him
among the tents, where Dian Wei was appointed as a special guard over her
apartments. Cao Cao was the only person whom she saw, and he passed the days in
idle dalliance with the lady, quite content to let time flow by.
But people told Zhang Xiu what had gone amiss, and he was angry at the shame
brought upon the family.
He confided his trouble to Jia Xu who said, “Keep this secret, wait till he
appears again to carry on business, and then do so and so.”
A plan was arranged quite secretly.
Next day Zhang Xiu went into Cao Cao’s tent, saying, “Since the surrendered
troops are deserting in great number, it would be well to camp them in the
center of your camp to prevent this.”
Cao Cao gave the permission, and Zhang Xiu moved and placed his army in four
camps.
But Dian Wei, the especial guard of Cao Cao’s tent, was a man to be feared,
being both brave and powerful. It was hard to know how to attack him. So
counsel was taken with Hu Juer, the commander of one camp and a man of enormous
strength and activity. He could carry a burden of six hundred pounds and two
hundred miles in a day. Hu Juer proposed a plan.
He said, “The fearsome thing about Dian Wei is his double halberds. But get
him to come to a party and make him quite drunk before you send him back. I
will mingle among his escort and so get into his tent and steal away his
weapons. One needs not fear him then.”
So the necessary arms were prepared and orders given in the various camps. This
done Zhang Xiu gave a banquet, and the intended victim was invited and plied
vigorously with wine so that he was quite intoxicated when he left. And, as
arranged, Hu Juer mingled with his escort and made away with his weapons.
That night, when Cao Cao was at supper with Lady Zhou, he heard the voices of
men and neighing of horses and sent out to ask what it meant. They told him it
was the night patrol going the rounds, and he was satisfied.
Near the second watch of the night again was heard some noise in the rear of
his tent, and one of the fodder carts was reported to be burning.
“One of the soldiers has dropped a spark; there is nothing to be alarmed
at,” said Cao Cao.
But very soon the fire spread on all sides and became alarming. Cao Cao called
Dian Wei. But he, usually so alert, was lying down quite intoxicated.
However, the beating of gongs and rolling of drums mingling with his dreams
awoke Dian Wei, and he jumped up. His trusty halberds had disappeared. The
enemy was near. He hastily snatched up an infantryman’s sword and rushed out.
At the gate he saw a crowd of spearmen just bursting in. Dian Wei rushed at
them slashing all around him, and twenty or more fell beneath his blows. The
others drew back. But the spears stood around him like reeds on the river bank.
Being totally without mail, he was soon wounded in several places. He fought
desperately till his sword snapped and was no longer of any use. Throwing it
aside he seized a couple of soldiers and with their bodies as weapons felled
ten of his opponents. The others dared not approach, but they shot arrows at
him. These fell thick as rain, but he still maintained the gate against the
assailants.
However, the mutineers got in by the rear of the camp, and they wounded Dian
Wei in the back with spear thrusts. Uttering a loud cry he fell. The blood
gushed from the wound in torrents, and he died. Even after he was dead not a
man dared to come in by the main gate.
Cao Cao, relying on Dian Wei to hold the main gate, had fled in haste by the
rear gate. Cao Amin accompanied him on foot. Then Cao Cao was wounded by an
arrow in the arm, and three arrows struck his horse. However, fortunately, the
horse was a fine Dawan beast full of spirit and, in spite of its wounds, it
bore its master swiftly and well as far as the bank of River Yu.
Here some of the pursuers came up, and Cao Amin was hacked to pieces. Cao Cao
dashed into the river and reached the further side, but there an arrow struck
his steed in the eye and it fell. Cao Cao’s eldest son, Cao Ang, dismounted
and yielded his horse to his father, who galloped on. Cao Ang was killed by
arrows, but Cao Cao himself got away. Soon after he met several of his officers
who had rallied a few troops.
The soldiers of Qingzhou under Xiahou Dun seized the occasion to plunder the
people. Yu Jin took his army, fell upon them, and slew many. Thus he protected
and appeased the people. The plunderers, meeting Cao Cao on the road, knelt
down howling and said Yu Jin had mutinied and attacked them. Cao Cao was
surprised, and he gave order to Xiahou Dun, Xu Chu, Li Dian, and Yue Jing to
attack Yu Jin.
Now when Yu Jin saw his master and a great company approaching, he at once
stopped the attack and set his troops to make a camp.
An officer asked him, “The Qingzhou soldiers say you have turned traitor. Why
do you not explain now that the Prime Minister has arrived? Why first make a
camp?”
Yu Jin replied, “Our enemies are coming up in our rear and are very close. It
is necessary to prepare for defense or we shall not withstand them. Explanation
is a small matter, but defense is very important.”
Soon after the camp was finished, Zhang Xiu fell upon them. Yu Jin himself rode
out to face them. Zhang Xiu drew back. The other generals of Yu Jin, seeing he
advance thus boldly, also attacked, and Zhang Xiu was overcome. They pursued
him a great distance until his force was almost annihilated. With the miserable
remnant he finally fled to Liu Biao.
Cao Cao’s army reformed, and the commanders mustered. Then Yu Jin went to see
his master and told him of the conduct of the Qingzhou soldiers and their
looting and why he had attacked them.
“Why did you not tell me before you made the camp?”
Yu Jin related what had occurred.
Said Cao Cao, “When the first thought of a leader in the time of greatest
stress is to maintain order and to strengthen his defenses, giving no thought
to slander but shouldering his burdens bravely, and when he thereby turns a
defeat into a victory, who, even of the ancient leaders, can excel Yu Jin?”
Cao Cao rewarded Yu Jin with a golden armor and the lordship of Yishou. But Cao
Cao reprimanded Xiahou Dun for the lack of discipline among his soldiers.
Sacrifices in honor of the dead warrior Dian Wei were instituted. Cao Cao
himself led the wailing and paid due honors.
Turning to his officers he said, “I have lost my first born son, but I grieve
not so heavily for him as for Dian Wei. I weep for him!”
All were sad at the loss of this general. Then orders were issued to return to
the capital.
When Imperial Legate Wang Ze, bearing the imperial decree, reached Xuzhou, he
was met by Lu Bu, who conducted him into the residence where the decree was
read. It conferred Lu Bu the title General Who Pacifies the East, and a special
seal accompanied the mandate. The private mediating letter was also handed over
and the messenger detailed the high appreciation in which Lu Bu was held by the
Chief Minister of State. Lu Bu was greatly pleased.
Next came news that a messenger from Yuan Shu had arrived.
When he had been introduced, he said, “My master’s project of declaring
himself emperor is advancing. He has already built a Palace and will speedily
choose Empress and concubines and would come to the South of River Huai. He is
looking forward to receiving the fiancee of the Heir Apparent.”
“Has the rebel gone so far?” cried Lu Bu in a rage.
He put the messenger to death and Han Yin into the cage. He drafted a memorial
of thanks and sent it to the capital, at the same time sending, too, Han Yin,
the unfortunate agent who had arranged the marriage alliance. He also replied
to Cao Cao’s private meditating letter asking to be confirmed in his
protectorship of Xuzhou. The letter was sent by the hand of Chen Deng.
Cao Cao was pleased to hear of the rupture of the marriage arrangement between
the houses of Yuans and Lus, and forthwith put Han Yin to death in the market
place.
However, Chen Deng secretly told Cao Cao, saying, “Lu Bu is cruel, stupid,
and facile. The longer he remains, the worse.”
“I know Lu Bu quite well,” replied Cao Cao. “He is a wolf with a savage
heart, and it will be hard to feed him for long. If it had not been for you and
your father, I should not have known all the circumstances and you must help me
to get rid of him.”
“Anything the Prime Minister wishes to do shall have my assistance,” was
the reply.
As a reward Cao Cao obtained an annually grant of two thousand carts of grain
for Chen Gui and the governorship of Guangling for Chen Deng, who then took his
leave.
As he was saying farewell, Cao Cao took him by the hand, saying, “I shall
depend upon you in the eastern affairs.”
Chen Deng nodded acquiescence. Then he returned to Lu Bu, who asked him how the
visit was.
Chen Deng told him, “My father received a generous annuity, and I was made
Governor of Guangling.”
Lu Bu enraged, saying, “You did not ask Xuzhou for me, but you got something
for yourself. Your father advised me to help Cao Cao by breaking off the
marriage, and now I get nothing at all of what I asked, while you and your
father get everything. I have been victimized by your father.”
He threatened Chen Deng with his sword.
Chen Deng only laughed, saying, “O General, how unwary you are!”
“I, unwary?”
“When I saw Cao Cao, I said that to keep you going was like feeding a tiger.
The tiger must be kept fully fed or he would eat humans. But Cao Cao laughed
and replied, ‘No, not that. One must treat the Commander like a falcon. Not
feed it till the foxes and hares are done. Hungry, the bird is of use; full fed
it flies away.’ I asked who were the quarry. He replied, ‘Yuan Shu of the
South of River Huai, Sun Ce of the South Land, Yuan Shao of Jizhou, Liu Biao of
Jingzhou, Liu Zhang of Yizhou, and Zhang Lu of Hanzhong; these are the foxes
and hares.’”
Lu Bu threw aside his sword and laughed, saying, “Yes, he understands me!”
But just about that time came news of the advance of Yuan Shu on Xuzhou, and
that frightened Lu Bu.
When discord rose between Qin and Jin,
They were attacked by Yue and Wu,
And when a promised bride never came,
An army marched to enforce the claim.
How all this fell out will be shown in the next chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 17 ****
large territory, was very influential. He was not a little puffed up. The
possession of the Imperial Hereditary Seal, pledged by Sun Ce, added to his
pride. And he seriously thought of assuming the full style.
As a preliminary he assembled all his officers and addressed them thus: “The
Supreme Ancestor, the Founder of Han Dynasty, was only a very minor official,
and yet he became ruler of the empire. The dynasty has endured four centuries,
and its measure of fortune has run out. It no longer possesses authority; the
cauldron is on the point of boiling over. My family has held the highest
offices of state for four generations and is universally respected. Wherefore I
wish, in response to the will of Heaven and the desire of the people, to assume
the Imperial Dignity. What think ye of the proposal, my officers?”
Secretary Yan Xiang rose in opposition at once, saying, “You may not do this.
King Wen, the Ancestor of the Zhou, was of distinguished virtue and held many
offices. Till the last years of Shang Dynasty, he had two thirds of the empire.
Still he served and was loyal to the ruling house. Your house is honorable, but
it is not so glorious as that of Zhou. The Hans may be reduced, but they are
not so abominably cruel as those of the Shang Dynasty that they are to be
overthrown. Indeed this should not be done.”
Yuan Shu did not hear this with pleasure.
Said he, “We Yuans came from the Chen family, the same ancestry with King
Shun. By the rule of interpreting the signs of fate, the day has come when
earth (Chen) receives fire (Liu). Beside there is an oracle saying, ‘One who
replaces the Hans must wade through deep mire.’ My name means ‘the high
road.’ It fits exactly. Further than this, I possess the Imperial Hereditary
Seal and must become lord of all, or I turn from Heaven’s own way. Finally, I
have made up my mind, so if anyone says too much, that person will simply
suffer death.”
Yuan Shu arrogated himself the insignia of royalty and assigned Second Glory
the reign title. He set up officials with titles only given by an emperor, and
rode in a chariot decorated with the dragon and phoenix, and offered sacrifices
after the manner of an emperor in the north and south suburbs. Also he
appointed the daughter of Feng Fang his Empress and his son Heir Apparent, and
he pressed for the early wedding of Lu Bu’s daughter with his son so that the
Palace entourage might be complete.
But when Yuan Shu heard of the fate of his marriage ambassador, Han Yin, who
was sent to the capital and was executed, Yuan Shu was very angry and began at
once to plan for revenge. He made Zhang Xun his Grand Commander and gave Zhang
Xun the command of more than two hundred thousand soldiers with the instruction
to invade Xuzhou. The army consisted of seven divisions under seven commanders:
Zhang Xun led the Center Army; Qiao Rui, the First Left Army; Lei Bo, the
Second Left Army; Han Xian, the Third Left Army; Chen Ji, First Right Army;
Chen Lan, Second Right Army; and Yang Feng, the Third Right Army. Each
commander was instructed to make a certain town his objective.
The Imperial Protector of Yangzhou, Jin Shang, was ordered to superintend the
commissariat, but he declined the office. And so Yuan Shu put Jin Shang to
death. Ji Ling was in command of the reserves to help wherever he was required.
Yuan Shu led thirty thousand troops, and he appointed three generals, Li Deng,
Liang Gang, and Yue Jiu, to go up and down and coordinate the grand march.
Lu Bu found out from his scouts that his own Xuzhou City was the objective of
Zhang Xun; the other towns to be first attacked being Xiaopei, Yidu, Langye,
Jieshi, Xiapi, and Junshan. The invading armies were marching twenty miles a
day, and plundering the countryside as they advanced.
Lu Bu summoned his advisers to a council to which came Chen Gong, Chen Deng,
and Chen Gui.
When all had assembled, Chen Gong said, “This misfortune that has come to us
is due to the two Chens, who fawned upon the central government in order to
obtain ranks and appointments. Now remove the evil by putting these two to
death and sending their heads to Yuan Shu. Then he will retire and leave us in
peace.”
Lu Bu acquiesced and had the two arrested.
But the son, Chen Deng, only laughed, saying, “What is this anxiety about?
These seven armies are no more to me than so many heaps of rotting straw. They
are not worth thinking about.”
“If you can show us how to overcome them, I will spare your life,” said Lu
Bu.
“General, if you will listen to poor me, the region will be perfectly
safe.”
“Let us hear what you have to say.”
“Yuan Shu’s troops are numerous but they are only a flock of crows; they
are not an army under a leader. There is no mutual confidence. I can keep them
at bay with the ordinary guards of the place and could overcome them by some
unsuspected stratagem. If I should fail, I have another plan by which I can not
only protect the region but capture our enemy.”
“Let us have it.”
Chen Deng said, “Han Xian and Yang Feng, two of the leaders of our enemies,
are old servants of the Han Dynasty who fled from fear of Cao Cao and, being
homeless, sought refuge with Yuan Shu. He despises them, and they are
dissatisfied with his service. A little letter from the court will secure their
help as our allies, and with Liu Bei to help us on the outside, we can
certainly overcome Yuan Shu.”
“You shall take the letters yourself,” said Lu Bu.
Chen Deng agreed, and a memorial detailing his intentions was sent to the
capital, letters to Yuzhou to Liu Bei, and finally Chen Deng was sent, with a
small escort, to wait for Han Xian on the road to Xiapi.
When Han Xian’s army had halted and pitched camp, Chen Deng went to see Han
Xian who said, “What are you here for? You belong to Lu Bu.”
“I am an official of the court of the great Hans. Why do you call me a Lu
Bu’s man? If you, General, hitherto a minister of state, now serve a traitor,
you will nullify the grand services you rendered in protecting the Emperor in
the flight from Changan. Beside, the suspicious Yuan Shu will assuredly do you
some harm, and you will regret not having taken this opportunity to work
against him.”
Han Xian sighed, saying, “I would return to my allegiance if there should be
any opportunity.”
Thereupon Chen Deng gave him Lu Bu’s letter asking for cooperation.
Han Xian read it and said, “Yes, I know. You may return to your master and
say General Yang Feng and I will turn our weapons and smite Yuan Shu. Look out
for a signal flare, and let your master come to our aid.”
As soon as Chen Deng had got back and reported his success, Lu Bu divided his
troops into five divisions, each of ten thousand, and sent them to five
threatened towns to meet his enemies. Gao Shun led one army to Xiaopei against
Qiao Rui; Chen Gong to Yidu against Chen Ji; Zhang Liao and Zang Ba to Langye
against Lei Bo; Song Xian and Wei Xu to Jieshi against Chen Lan. Lu Bu himself
led against the main body under Zhang Xun, leaving a small guard in Xuzhou
City.
Lu Bu camped ten miles from the walls. When the enemy came up, Zhang Xun
thought Lu Bu too strong to attack with the force he had, so he retired seven
miles to await reinforcements.
That night, in the second watch, Han Xian and Yang Feng arrived, and soon the
flare was lighted as arranged. Lu Bu’s troops were admitted to the camp and
caused great confusion. Then Lu Bu gave a full attack, and Zhang Xun was routed
and fled. Lu Bu pursued till daylight, when he fell in with one of the other
bodies led by Ji Ling. Both sides faced each other; but at the very beginning
of the engagement Yang Feng and Han Xian also attacked, and Ji Ling was forced
to fly.
Lu Bu went in pursuit but soon another force came out from the rear of some
hills. These looked very imposing. As the ranks opened Lu Bu saw a leader’s
guard with flags bearing dragons and phoenixes and representations of the sun
and moon, the stars in the four groups of the Great Bear Constellation, the
five directions of the Earth, golden gourds, silver axes, yellow halberds,
white yaks’ tails, all imperial emblems. And beneath a yellow silken parasol
sat Yuan Shu on horseback, clad in silver mail with a sword handle showing at
each wrist.
Standing out in front of the array, Yuan Shu railed at his opponent calling him
traitor and bastard. Lu Bu said nothing but rode forward ready for battle, and
Li Deng, one of Yuan Shu’s leaders, advanced to take the challenge. They met,
but at the third bout, Li Deng was wounded in the hand, whereupon his spear
fell to the ground, and he fled. Lu Bu waved on the advance, and his men
prevailed. The other side fled, leaving much spoil, clothing, mail, and horses.
Yuan Shu’s defeated troops had not gone far when a strong army, led by Guan
Yu, appeared barring his way.
“Traitor! Why have they not slain you?” cried Guan Yu.
Whereat Yuan Shu fled in great trepidation, and his army melted into fugitives
in all directions. The new army fell upon them with great slaughter. Yuan Shu
and the remnant of his army retreated into the below regions of River Huai.
Victory being now secure, Lu Bu, in company with Guan Yu, Yang Feng, and Han
Xian returned to Xuzhou, where there were banquets and feasting and rewards for
the soldiers and generals of five divisions. These over, Guan Yu took his leave
and returned to Yuzhou, while Han Xian was appointed Governor of Yidu, and Yang
Feng Governor of Langye.
There had been a question of keeping these two in Xuzhou City, but Chen Gui
opposed it, saying, “Let them hold those places in Huashan Mountains, which
will be all yours within a year.”
So Han Xian and Yang Feng were sent to these two cities in the meantime to
await orders.
“Why not retain them here?” asked Chen Deng secretly of his father. “They
would be a basis for our conspiracy against Lu Bu.”
“But if they helped him, on the other hand, we should lengthen the tiger’s
claws and teeth,” said Chen Gui.
So Chen Deng could only approve of his father’s precautions.
Yuan Shu returned home burning to avenge his defeat, so he sent to the South
Land to ask a loan of troops from Sun Ce.
But Sun Ce said, “On the strength of holding the State Seal, he secretly
calls himself emperor and rebels against the Hans. I would rather punish such a
renegade than help him.”
So Sun Ce rejected. The letter refusing help added to Yuan Shu’s anger.
“What next from this callow youth?” cried Yuan Shu. “I will smite him
before I deal with the others.”
But his adviser, Yang Dajiang, dissuaded him from this course.
Having refused help to his powerful rival, Sun Ce thought it wise to take
measures for his own safety. So he stationed an army at Jiangkou. Soon after
came a messenger from Cao Cao bearing Sun Ce’s appointment as Governor of
Kuaiji with orders to raise an army and reduce Yuan Shu.
Sun Ce was inclined to carry out these orders, but he called a council at which
Zhang Zhao opposed this course.
Said he, “Although recently defeated, Yuan Shu has large army and ample
supplies. He is not to be attacked lightly. You had better write to Cao Cao
persuading him to attack the South of River Huai and we will be auxiliaries.
Between the two armies, Yuan Shu must certainly be defeated. If by the remotest
chance we lose, we have Cao Cao to come to our rescue.”
This plan was adopted, and a messenger was sent to lay it before Cao Cao. In
the meantime, after the defeat at River Yu, Cao Cao had reached Xuchang where
his first thought was to institute sacrifices to his beloved lost leader, Dian
Wei. He conferred rank upon his son Dian Man and took him into his own palace
to be cared for.
Presently arrived Sun Ce’s messenger with letters, and next came a report
that Yuan Shu, being short of food, had made a raid on Chenliu. Cao Cao thought
the moment opportune, so he issued orders for the south expedition, leaving Cao
Ren to hold the capital. The army marched, horse and foot, one hundred seventy
thousand, with commissariat wagons of food to the number of over a thousand.
Messages were sent to summon Sun Ce, Liu Bei, and Lu Bu.
Liu Bei was the first to welcome the grand army at his Yuzhou borders, and he
was called in to the Prime Minister’s tent. After the usual salutations, two
human heads were produced by Liu Bei.
“Whose are these?” asked Cao Cao in surprise.
“The heads of Han Xian and Yang Feng.”
“Why did this happen?”
“They were sent to control Yidu and Langye, but they allowed their soldiers
to plunder the people. Bitter complaints arose, so I invited them to a banquet
and my brothers dispatched them when I gave the signal by dropping a cup. Their
armies gave in at once. Now I have to apologize for my fault.”
“You have removed an evil, which is a grand service: Why talk of a fault?”
And Cao Cao praised Liu Bei’s action.
When the joint army reached Lu Bu’s Xuzhou borders, he came to meet it. Cao
Cao spoke graciously to him and conferred upon him the title of General of the
Left Army, promising him an official seal as soon as he returned to the
capital. Lu Bu was very pleased.
Then the three armies were made into one force, Cao Cao being in the center, Lu
Bu to the left wing, and Liu Bei to the right wing. Xiahou Dun and Yu Jin were
Leaders of the Van.
On Yuan Shu’s side, General Qiao Rui with fifty thousand troops was appointed
Van Leader. The armies met on the confines of the city of Shouchun. Qiao Rui
and Xiahou Dun rode out and opened battle. But Qiao Rui fell in the third bout,
and his troops fled into the city.
Then came news that Sun Ce’s fleet was near and would attack on the west. The
other three land corps took each one face —-Cao Cao on the north, Lu Bu on
the east, and Liu Bei on the south. The city of Shouchun was in a parlous
state.
At this juncture Yuan Shu summoned his officers.
Yang Dajiang explained the case, “Shouchun has suffered from drought for
several years, and the people are on the verge of famine. Sending an army would
add to the distress and anger the people, and victory would be uncertain. I
advise not to send any more soldiers there, but to hold on till the besiegers
are conquered by lack of supplies. Meanwhile, Your Highness, with regiment of
guards, will move over to the other side of River Huai, which is quite ready,
and we shall also escape the enemy’s ferocity.”
So due arrangements was made. One hundred thousand troops under Li Deng, Yue
Jiu, Liang Gang, and Chen Ji were appointed to guard Shouchun. Then a general
move was made to the other side of the River Huai. Not only the remained army
went over, but all the accumulated wealth of the Yuan family, gold and silver,
jewels and precious stones, were moved also.
Cao Cao’s army of one hundred seventy thousand needed daily a considerable
quantity of food; and as the country around had been famine-stricken for
several years, nothing could be got there. So he tried to hasten the military
operations and capture the city. On the other hand, the defenders knew the
value of delay and simply held on. After a month’s vigorous siege, the fall
of Shouchun seemed as far off as it was at first, and supplies were very short.
Letters were sent to Sun Ce who sent a hundred thousand carts of grain. When
the usual distribution became impossible, the Chief of the Commissariat, Ren
Jun, and the Controller of the Granaries, Wang Hou, presented a statement
asking what was to be done.
“Serve out with a smaller measure,” said Cao Cao. “That will save us for
a time.”
“But if the soldiers murmur, what then?”
“I shall have another device.”
As ordered the controller issued grain in a short measure. Cao Cao sent
secretly to find out how the army took this; and when he found that complaints
were general and the soldiers were saying that the Prime Minister was fooling
them, he sent a secret summons to the controller.
When Wang Hou came, Cao Cao said, “I want to ask you to lend me something to
pacify the soldiers with. You must not refuse.”
“What does the Prime Minister wish?”
“I want the loan of your head to expose to the soldiery.”
“But I have done nothing wrong!” exclaimed the unhappy man.
“I know that, but if I do not put you to death, there will be a mutiny. After
you are gone, your wife and children shall be my care. So you need not grieve
on their account.”
Wang Hou was about to remonstrate further, but Cao Cao gave a signal. The
executioners hustled Wang Hou out, and he was beheaded. His head was exposed on
a tall pole, and a notice said:
“In accordance with military law, Wang Hou had been put to death for
peculation and the use of a short measure in issuing grain.”
This appeased the discontent. Next followed a general order threatening death
to all commanders if the city was not taken within three days. Cao Cao in
person went up to the very walls to superintend the work of filling up the
moat. The defenders kept up constant showers of stones and arrows. Two inferior
officers, who left their stations in fear, were slain by Cao Cao himself.
Thereafter he went on foot to work with his soldiers and to see that work went
on continuously and no one dared be a laggard. Thus encouraged, the army became
invincible, and no defense could withstand their onslaught. In a very short
time the walls were scaled, the gates battered in, and the besiegers were in
possession. The officers of the garrison —-Li Deng, Yue Jiu, Liang Gang, and
Chen Ji —-were captured alive and were executed in the market place. All the
paraphernalia of imperial state were burned, and the whole city wrecked.
When the question of crossing the river in pursuit of Yuan Shu came up, Xun Yu
opposed it, saying, “The country has suffered from short crops for years, and
we should be unable to get grain. An advance would weary the army, harm the
people, and possibly end in disaster. I advise a return to the capital to wait
there till the spring wheat shall have been harvested and we have plenty of
food.”
Cao Cao hesitated.
Before he had made up his mind, there came an urgent message: “Zhang Xiu,
with the support of Liu Biao, was ravaging the country all round. There were
rebellions in Nanyang and Jiangling, and Cao Hong could not cope with it. Cao
Hong had been worsted already in several engagements and was in sore
straits.”
Cao Cao at once wrote to Sun Ce to command the Great River so as to prevent any
move on the part of Liu Biao, while he prepared his army to go to deal with
Zhang Xiu. Before marching Cao Cao directed Liu Bei to station at Xiaopei, as
he and Lu Bu being as brothers might help each other.
When Lu Bu had left for Xuzhou, Cao Cao said secretly to Liu Bei, “I am
leaving you at Xiaopei to dig a ‘pitfall for the tiger.’ You will only take
advice from Chen Deng and Chen Gui, and there can be no mishap. You will find
so-and-so your ally when needed.”
So Cao Cao marched to Xuchang where he heard that Duan Wei had slain Li Jue and
Wu Xi killed Guo Si, and they presented the heads of these two. Beside the
whole clan of Li Jue, more than two hundred, had been arrested and brought to
the capital. They were all put to death at various gates and their heads
exposed as warning. The people cheered the end of those two rebels.
In the Emperor’s palace a large number of officials were assembled at a peace
banquet. The Emperor rewarded the two successful leaders, Duan Wei with the
title of General Who Destroys Rebellion and Wu Xi General Who Wrecks Villainy,
and sent to guard Changan. They came to audience to express their gratitude and
marched away.
Then Cao Cao sent in a memorial that Zhang Xiu was in rebellion, and an army
must be sent against him. The Emperor in person arranged the chariot and
escorted Cao Cao out of the city when he went to take command of the
expedition. It was the summer, the fourth month of the third year of Rebuilt
Tranquillity (AD 198). Xun Yu was in chief military command in Xuchang.
The army marched away. In the course of the march they passed through a wheat
region, and the grain was ready for harvesting but the peasants had fled for
fear, and the corn was uncut. Cao Cao sent proclamations to all villages and
towns:
“I am sent on the expedition by command of the Emperor to capture a rebel and
save the people. I cannot avoid moving in the harvest season; but if anyone
trample down the corn, he shall be put to death. Military law is strict without
exception, and the people need fear no damage.”
The people were very pleased and lined the road, wishing success to the
expedition. When the soldiers passed wheat fields, they dismounted and pushed
aside the stalks so that none were trampled down.
One day, when Cao Cao was riding through the fields, a dove suddenly got up,
startling the horse so that it swerved into the standing grain, and a large
patch was trampled down. Cao Cao at once called the Provost Marshal and bade
him decree the sentence for the crime of trampling down corn.
“How can I deal with your crime?” asked the Provost Marshal.
“I made the rule, and I have broken it. Can I otherwise satisfy public
opinion?”
Cao Cao laid hold of the sword by his side and made to take his own life. All
hastened to prevent him.
Guo Jia said, “In ancient days, the days of the Spring and Autumn history,
the laws were not applied to those of the most important. You are the supreme
leader of a mighty army and must not wound yourself.”
Cao Cao pondered for a long time. At last he said, “Since there exists the
reason just quoted, I may perhaps escape the death penalty.”
Then with his sword he cut off his hair and threw it on the ground, saying,
“I cut off the hair as touching the head.”
Then he sent messengers to exhibit the hair throughout the whole army, saying,
“The Prime Minister, having trodden down some corn, ought to have lost his
head by the terms of the order; now here is his hair cut off as an attack on
the head.”
This deed was a stimulus to discipline all through the army so that not a
person dared be disobedient. A poet wrote:
A myriad soldiers march along and all are brave and bold,
And their myriad inclinations by one leader are controlled.
That crafty leader shore his locks when forfeit was his head,
O full of guile were thou, Cao Cao, as everyone has said.
On the first news of the approach of Cao Cao with an army, Zhang Xiu wrote to
Liu Biao for help. Then Zhang Xiu led out his troops, with his two generals,
Lei Xu and Zhang Xian.
When the array was complete Zhang Xiu took his station in front and pointing at
Cao Cao railed at him, saying, “O false and pretended supporter of
benevolence and justice! O shameless one! You are just a beast of the forest,
and absolutely devoid of humanity.”
This annoyed Cao Cao who sent out Xu Chu against the insulter. Zhang Xian came
to meet him and fell in the third bout. Thence Zhang Xiu’s troops fled and
were pursued to the very walls of Nanyang, only managing to get within just
before the pursuit came up. The city was then closely besieged.
Seeing the moat was so wide and deep that approach to the wall would be
difficult, Cao Cao’s commanders began to fill up the ditch with earth. Then
with sand bags, brushwood, and bundles of grass they built a great mound near
the wall and on this erected steps so that they could look over into the city.
Cao Cao rode round the city closely inspecting the defenses. Three days later
he issued an order to make a mound of earth and brushwood at the northwest
corner, as he would mount the walls at that point. He was observed from within
the city by Jia Xu.
Jia Xu went to Zhang Xiu and said, “I know what Cao Cao intends, and I can
defeat him by a countermove.”
Even amongst the very foremost
There is one who leads the way;
Someone sees through your devices,
Be as crafty as ye may.
What the counter-move was will be told in the next chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 18 ****
Jia Xu, as he had guessed the enemy’s intention, had also devised a
countermove. So he went to his chief and said, “I saw Cao Cao very carefully
reconnoitering round about the city. He certainly noticed that the southeast
corner of the wall had been lately restored with mud bricks of a different
kind, and that the fencing barrier is badly out of repair. He will try to
effect an entrance there. Wherefore he is making a feint attack at the opposite
point. He is piling up straw and making ostentatious preparations whereby to
cajole us into withdrawing from the real point of attack to defend the
northwest. His troops will scale the walls in the darkness and try to enter at
the southeast.”
“Supposing your surmise correct, what do you advise?” asked Zhang Xiu.
“The countermove is plain. You issue an order for our best and bravest
soldiers to fill their bellies, to take only the lightest outfit and conceal
themselves in the houses near the southeast corner. Then disguise the
townspeople as soldiers and send them to pretend to defend the northwest.
Tonight we will let the enemy climb up the walls and enter the city and, once
they are fairly within, give the signal and the concealed soldiers will rush
out upon them. We may even capture Cao Cao himself.”
The stratagem was decided upon.
Soon the scouts told Cao Cao: “The defenders of the city have moved to the
northwest where noisy preparations for defense are going on. The opposite
corner is left undefended.”
“They have fallen into my trap!” said Cao Cao gleefully.
He ordered his troops to prepare shovels and hooks and all the gear needed for
scaling walls, and all day they kept up the attack on the northwest angle.
But at the second watch they dispatched the veterans to the opposite corner,
where they climbed the wall, broke up the fencing barrier, and got into the
city apparently without disturbing any of the guards. There was no sign of life
anywhere as they entered. But just as they were leaving the wall, suddenly a
bomb exploded and they found themselves in an ambush. They turned to retire,
but Zhang Xiu immediately fell on the rear and began a slaughter. Cao Cao’s
troops were totally defeated and fled out of the gate into the country. Zhang
Xiu kept up the pursuit till daybreak, when he retired into the city again.
Cao Cao then rallied his army and mustered his soldiers. He had lost fifty
thousand and much baggage, while two of his generals, Lu Qian and Yu Jin were
wounded.
Cao Cao being thus worsted, Jia Xu advised Zhang Xiu to write off to Liu Biao
to cut off Cao Cao’s retreat so that he might be utterly destroyed.
Liu Biao was preparing an army for this purpose, when a scout came to say that
Sun Ce had encamped in the river at Hukou.
Kuai Liang said, “This move of Sun Ce in the river is part of Cao Cao’s
strategy, and there will be never-ending regret if Cao Cao is allowed to
escape. An immediate expedition is necessary.”
Wherefore Liu Biao moved out with his army to Anzhong to block Cao Cao, leaving
Huang Zu to hold Jingzhou’s points of vantage. Zhang Xiu, having been
informed of the movement of Liu Biao, went with Jia Xu to smite Cao Cao on the
rear.
In the meantime Cao Cao’s army, marching very leisurely, had arrived at
Xiangyang.
Walking one day beside River Yu, he suddenly uttered a great cry, and when his
officers asked the reason thereof, he replied, “I remembered that here, only
a year ago, I lost my great general: Dian Wei. Is that not a reason to
grieve?”
Thereupon Cao Cao gave orders to halt, while he should make a great sacrifice
and mourn for his lost leader. At the ceremony he himself burned incense and
wailed and prostrated himself. The army was much affected by his devotion.
After the sacrifices to the lost hero, he sacrificed to the names of his nephew
Cao Amin and his eldest son Cao Ang, both of whom had died at the same time. He
also sacrificed to his lost soldiers and even to his Dawan steed which had been
killed by an arrow.
Next day Xun Yu wrote to tell Cao Cao that Liu Biao had gone to help Zhang Xiu
and was camped at Anzhong, thereby cutting his road of retreat.
Cao Cao replied to the letter, saying, “I have been marching only a short
distance each day and of course knew of the pursuit. But my plans are laid and,
as I am near Anzhong, my enemy will be broken. You need not have any fears.”
Then Cao Cao hastened his march till he came near where Liu Biao had taken
position. Zhang Xiu still shortened the distance. Cao Cao ordered his men
during the night to open a secret way through a pass, where he laid an ambush.
With the first light of dawn Liu Biao and Zhang Xiu met. As Cao Cao’s force
looked small, they thought he had retired so they boldly advanced into the pass
to smite him. Then the ambush was opened, and both the attackers’ forces were
cut up. The fighting ended; Cao Cao’s soldiers went outside the pass and
encamped.
The two leaders on the other side restored order among their beaten troops and
then held a conference.
“How could we have foreseen such a wicked ruse?” said Liu Biao.
“Let us try again,” said Zhang Xiu.
Wherefore they joined forces at Anzhong.
But Xun Yu discovered through his spies that Yuan Shao was preparing an attack
on Capital Xuchang, so he at once wrote to Cao Cao who, much disturbed by this
news, set out homeward right away. When Zhang Xiu heard this through his
scouts, he wished to follow the retreating army.
Jia Xu opposed it and said, “It will lead to a defeat.”
However, Liu Biao said, “It is wrong to lose such a chance.”
And so finally pursuit was decided upon. They had not marched more than four
miles before they came upon Cao Cao’s rearguard, who fought with great vigor
and bravery so that the pursuers were beaten off and went home discomfited.
Zhang Xiu said to Jia Xu, “This defeat comes from my not following your
advice.”
“Now set your army in order and pursue,” said Jia Xu.
“But we have just suffered defeat!” cried both leaders. “Do you now
counsel pursuit?”
“Yes, and the result will be a great victory if you go now. I will venture my
head on that,” said Jia Xu.
Zhang Xiu had confidence, but Liu Biao was afraid and would not accompany him.
So one army only started in pursuit.
However, this was enough. Cao Cao’s rear-guard was thoroughly routed and
abandoned their wagons and their baggage in their hasty flight. Zhang Xiu
pursued, but suddenly a troop came out from the shelter of some hills and
checked him. Fearful to try further, he hastened back to Anzhong.
The other general, Liu Biao, asked the adviser to explain his apparent
inconsistency, saying, “When our veteran and brave soldiers were going to
pursue those who retreated, you said our men would lose the day; and when
defeated men pursued the victors, you foretold victory. You were right in both
cases, but we wish you would enlighten us.”
“It is easy to explain. You, Generals, although skilled leaders, are not a
match for our enemy. Though Cao Cao had lost a battle, he had able generals to
keep the rear and guard against pursuit. Our soldiers are good, but not a match
for them. That is how I knew. For as much as Cao Cao’s hurried retreat was
due to trouble in the capital, and he had beaten off our attack, I knew he
would retire at his utmost speed and not take his usual precautions. I ventured
to take advantage of his laxity.”
Liu Biao and Zhang Xiu could not but affirm his complete understanding of the
conditions. On the advice of Jia Xu then Liu Biao returned to Jingzhou, while
Zhang Xiu took up his position at Xiangyang so that each strengthened the other
as the lips protect the teeth from cold.
When Cao Cao, during his retreat, heard that his army was being pursued, he
hastily turned back to support the rearguard. Then he saw the pursuing army
draw off.
The soldiers of the beaten rearguard said, “Had it not been for the troops
that came out of the hills, we should all have been lost.”
“What troops?” asked Cao Cao in surprise.
The leader of the troops then advanced, slung his spear and, dismounting, made
a low obeisance. He was Li Tong, Imperial Commander, from Jiangxia.
Cao Cao asked him why he had come.
Li Tong replied, “I was in command at Runan when I heard of the struggle
going on, so I came to lend you any help I could.”
To show his gratitude, Cao Cao conferred upon Li Tong the title Lord Who
Renders High Services, and confirmed him in his command as the defense of Runan
against Liu Biao and Zhang Xiu. Then Li Tong expressed his thanks and took his
leave.
On his return to the capital, Cao Cao presented a memorial on the good services
rendered by Sun Ce, and the Emperor made him Lord of Wu with the title General
Who Destroys Rebels. The messenger bearing the decree bore also the order to
repress Liu Biao.
Cao Cao went to his palace and there received the ceremonial calls of
congratulation. These finished, Xun Yu asked, saying, “You, Sir, marched very
leisurely to Anzhong: How came it that you felt certain of victory?”
Cao Cao replied, “My soldiers, who retire and find their retreat cut off,
fight vigorously and desperately. I retired slowly to entice the enemy into
following whereby I could do as I wished with them. Basing my movements on
these considerations I felt secure.”
Xun Yu bowed his head in admiration.
When Guo Jia entered, Cao Cao said, “Why so late, Sir?”
The visitor drew a letter from his sleeve, saying to his master, “Yuan Shao
sends this expressing he desires to send an army to attack Gongsun Zan and
wishes you to lend provisions and troops.”
“I heard Yuan Shao was going to attack Xuchang. I suppose my return has made
him change his intention,” said Cao Cao.
Then he opened the letter and read it. It was couched in very arrogant terms.
“Yuan Shao is so exceedingly rude that I will attack him,” said Cao Cao.
“Only I think I am not quite strong enough. What should be done?”
Guo Jia said, “My lord, you know well who lost, and why, in the conflict
between Liu Bang, the Supreme Ancestor, and Xiang Yu, his rival. The former won
only by superior wisdom. Xiang Yu was the stronger, but in the end he was
overcome. Your rival has ten weak points whereas you have ten strong ones, and,
though his army is large, it is not terrible.”
Then Guo Jia continued, “Yuan Shao is overmuch devoted to ceremony and
deportment; while you are sympathetic and natural; this is an excellence in
conduct. He is antagonistic and drives; you are conciliatory and lead; so you
have the advantage of popular approval. For many years the government has been
lax, and he makes it more so; you strive vigorously after efficiency; this is
the excellence of able administration. He is outwardly liberal but grudging at
heart, and too given to nepotism; you appear exacting, but you understand and
use people after their ability; this is the advantage of correct appreciation.
He is a visionary but lacking in decision; you are a man of prompt decision and
direct action; this is an advantage in policy. He loves to gather about him
people of renown; you treat people as you find them regardless of their
reputation; this is where you excel in moral virtue. He is compassionate to
those at hand, but careless about those out of sight; your care is all-
embracing; this is where you excel in humanity. He lends a ready ear to calumny
and is misled; you may be flooded with evil counsel, but you preserve
independence; this is where you excel in perspicacity. His sense of right and
wrong is confused; your appreciation is accurate and clear; this is where you
excel in administrative capacity. He loves the make-believe force, but is
ignorant of military essentials; you would overcome with far inferior numbers
as you possess military genius; this is where you excel in war. With your ten
superiorities, you will have no difficulty in overcoming Yuan Shao.”
“How can I be worth as much as you say?” said Cao Cao, smiling.
“What Guo Jia has said about the ten points in your favor agrees exactly with
what I think,” said Xun Yu. “Yuan Shao’s army is not formidable in spite
of its size.”
“The real and dangerous enemy is Lu Bu,” said Guo Jia. “When Yuan Shao
has gone north to destroy Gongsun Zan, we ought to sweep away Lu Bu and so
clear away our danger from that side; for if this is not done, our attack on
Yuan Shao will be the signal for an attempt on the capital. That would be most
serious.”
Cao Cao saw things in the same light as his advisers and began to discuss plans
for an attack on Lu Bu. Xun Yu was of opinion that they should first secure the
fidelity and aid of Liu Bei. So letters were written, and they waited his
assurance before moving a soldier. Then, in order to reassure Yuan Shao, his
emissary was treated with great kindness, and a memorial presented to the
Emperor asking extra honors for him. Yuan Shao was made Imperial Protector of
the four northern regions —-Jizhou, Qingzhou, Youzhou, and Bingzhou. With all
this a private letter was written by Cao Cao urging upon him to attack Gongsun
Zan and promising assistance. So Yuan Shao’s army started.
In the meantime the two Chen Deng and Chen Gui were playing their game. At
every feast and gathering in Xuzhou, they uttered the most fulsome praises of
Lu Bu. Chen Gong was greatly displeased and took an opportunity to talk about
them to his master.
“They flatter you to your face, but what is in their hearts? You ought to be
most carefully on your guard.”
“Hold your tongue!” was the angry reply. “You are simply slandering them
without the slightest excuse. You want to harm good people.”
“No ears for loyal words,” said Chen Gong, as he went away sad at heart,
“and we shall suffer.”
He thought seriously of abandoning Lu Bu, but that would be too painful a
wrench. Beside he feared people would laugh at him.
So the days passed sorrowfully for him. One day, with a few horsemen, he rode
out to the country near Xiaopei to hunt. On the high road he saw a messenger
galloping along in hot haste and began to wonder what it might mean. He left
the hunt, rode across country, and intercepted the rider.
“Where are you from? Who sent you?” asked Chen Gong.
The messenger made no reply for he knew to what party his captors belonged. But
they searched him and found a letter, the secret reply to Cao Cao’s letter
from Liu Bei. The messenger and the letter were both taken straight to Lu Bu.
Lu Bu questioned the man, who said, “The Prime Minister sent me to bear a
letter to Imperial Protector Liu Bei. I was now taking back the reply. I know
nothing more, and I am ignorant of the contents of the letters.”
So Lu Bu tore it open and read:
“I have received your commands concerning the destruction of Lu Bu, and dare
I for a moment venture to disregard them? But my force is weak and I must act
with extreme circumspection. If you move your main body, then I will hasten
forward, and in the meantime my army shall be got ready and weapons prepared. I
await your command.”
Lu Bu was really alarmed.
“The wretches!” cried he. “To dare to act thus!”
The unhappy messenger was put to death and countermoves planned. Chen Gong and
Zang Ba went to enlist the help of the Taishan Mountains bandits —-Sun Guan,
Wu Dun, Yin Li, and Chang Xi —-so that they would take Yanzhou in the East of
Huashan Mountains. Gao Shun and Zhang Liao went to attack Liu Bei in Xiaopei.
Song Xian and Wei Xu went west to attack Runan and Yingchuan. And Lu Bu took
command of a large body of troops ready to afford help wherever needed.
The departure of the army under Gao Shun against Xiaopei was reported to Liu
Bei, who assembled his officers at a council.
Sun Qian advised sending a message to the capital to inform Cao Cao of their
danger. In response to the chief’s call, Jian Yong, a fellow townsman of Liu
Bei, offered to take the message. Up to that moment Jian Yong had served as a
secretary. So a letter was written, and Jian Yong set out at once on his
journey.
Then preparations were made for defense: Liu Bei commanding at the south gate;
Sun Qian at the north gate; Guan Yu at the west gate; and Zhang Fei at the east
gate. Mi Zhu and his brother Mi Fang commanded the family guard in the center.
The two Mis were put in command of the house guard because they were Liu
Bei’s brothers-in-law; Liu Bei had taken a sister of Mi Zhu as a second wife.
Hence they were suitable men to guard the family.
In due course Gao Shun came to the south gate. Liu Bei ascended the tower and
said, “I have no quarrel with your master, why do you come here with an
army?”
“You have plotted with Cao Cao to injure my master as we know now: Why should
I not bind you?”
So saying Gao Shun gave the signal to attack. But Liu Bei did not go out to
repulse Gao Shun; he only kept the gate fast closed.
Soon after, Zhang Liao led an attack on the west gate, then kept by Guan Yu,
who addressed Zhang Liao from the wall.
“You are too good a man to waste yourself on rebels,” said Guan Yu.
Zhang Liao hung his head and made no reply. Guan Yu knew that Zhang Liao had a
sound heart and high principles and said no more, as he was unwilling to wound
Zhang Liao. Nor did he go out to attack.
Zhang Liao then drew off and proceeded to the east gate, and Zhang Fei went out
to give battle. Soon it was told Guan Yu, who came over quickly. He saw Zhang
Fei going out, but Zhang Liao was already withdrawing. Zhang Fei wished to
pursue, but his brother held him back.
“He is afraid and so has gone away. It would be best to pursue,” said Zhang
Fei.
“No,” said Guan Yu. “As a warrior he is not inferior to either of us, but
I have spoken a few straight words, and he has sunk deep. He is repentant and
that is why he will not meet us.”
So Zhang Fei understood, and the gates were shut and orders given for careful
defense. When Jian Yong, Liu Bei’s messenger, reached the capital, he saw Cao
Cao and told him what had happened. The advisers were called to discuss a plan.
Cao Cao said, “I wish to attack Lu Bu. I fear not Yuan Shao, but Liu Biao and
Zhang Xiu may attack me in the rear.”
Xun You, the nephew of Xun Yu, replied, “Both these latter have been too
recently defeated to do anything so rash. But Lu Bu is a bold fighting man, and
if he joined forces with Yuan Shu and they set themselves to conquer River Huai
and River Si, the problem would he difficult.”
Then spoke Guo Jia, “Let us take advantage of the moment before they have
fully made up their mind. Smite before they are fully prepared.”
And Cao Cao did so. An army of fifty thousand were sent in advance with four
commanders —-Xiahou Dun, Xiahou Yuan, Lu Qian, and Li Dian. Cao Cao commanded
the Center Army, which marched by divisions, and Jian Yong brought up the rear.
Soon the scouts informed Gao Shun. He sent flying messengers to Lu Bu, who
detached two hundred horse with Hou Cheng, Cao Xing, and He Meng to assist him.
Gao Shun posted this reinforcement and his army about ten miles from Xiaopei to
meet Cao Cao’s army. Lu Bu and the main army also followed close.
When Liu Bei saw the enemy retiring from the city, he knew Cao Cao’s army was
close at hand. So, making arrangements for guarding the city within, he and his
two brothers marched their troops out of the city and made a camp, that they
might be ready to assist.
Now the division of Cao Cao’s army under Xiahou Dun, having marched out in
advance, first came into touch with Gao Shun. Xiahou Dun at once rode out with
spear set and offered a challenge. It was accepted and the two leaders fought
half a hundred bouts. Then Gao Shun began to weaken and had to turn back. He
rode round to the rear of his array. Xiahou Dun was not the man to quail, so he
followed right into the enemy’s country. Then Cao Xing, one of Lu Bu’s
generals, secretly strung his bow, fitted an arrow and, when Xiahou Dun had
come quite near, shot at him. The arrow hit Xiahou Dun full in the left eye. He
shrieked, and putting up his head, pulled out the arrow and with it the eye.
“Essence of my father, blood of my mother, I cannot throw this away!” cried
Xiahou Dun, and he put the eye into his mouth and swallowed it.
Then resuming his firm grip of his spear, Xiahou Dun went after this new enemy.
There was no escape for Cao Xing. He was overtaken and fell with a fatal spear
wound full in the face. Both sides were stricken dumb with amazement.
Having thus slain the man who had wounded him, Xiahou Dun rode back toward his
own side. Gao Shun went in pursuit and, waving on his army, attacked so
vigorously that he won the day. Xiahou Yuan defended for his elder brother as
they fled. Lu Qian and Li Dian led various divisions back to Jibei and made a
camp.
Gao Shun, having scored this victory, returned to attack Liu Bei; and as Lu Bu
opportunely arrived with Zhang Liao, these three arranged their forces so that
each attacked one of the brothers.
Dauntless was Xiahou Dun, that warrior bold,
His courage had been proved of old;
But smitten sore one hapless day,
He might not in the battle stay.
The fate of Liu Bei will be told in the next chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 19 ****
while Lu Bu attacked Zhang Fei. Both brothers went out to give battle, while
Liu Bei force was held in reserve. But then Lu Bu suddenly attacked both Guan
Yu and Zhang Fei from the rear, and the brothers were forced to flee. Liu Bei
with a few score of horsemen rushed back to Xiaopei. As he approached the gate
with Lu Bu pressing him close, he shouted to the soldiers on the wall to lower
the drawbridge. Lu Bu was so close behind that the archers on the wall feared
to shoot lest they should wound their lord, and so Lu Bu got into the gate. The
gate guards could not force him back so they scattered in all directions. Lu Bu
led his force into the city.
Liu Bei saw the position was too desperate for him to reach his residence, and
he must abandon all his family. So he hastened through the city and left by the
west gate out at which he and his scanty following fled for very life.
When Lu Bu reached the residence, he was met by Mi Zhu who said, “The hero
does not destroy a person’s family. Your rival for the empire is Cao Cao, and
my master, always mindful of the good turn you did him at the Archery Feast,
would not be ungrateful. But he could not help going to Cao Cao, and I think
you will pity him.”
Lu Bu replied, “We two are old friends. How could I bear to harm his wives
and children?”
Whereupon he sent the family to Xuzhou with Mi Zhu to take care of them. Next
Lu Bu led his army into Huashan Mountains to Yanzhou, leaving Gao Shun and
Zhang Liao to guard Xiaopei.
During these troubles Sun Qian had also fled out of the city. Guan Yu and Zhang
Fei, each with a handful of soldiers, had got away to the hills. As Liu Bei
with his few horsemen was making the best of their way from the scene of his
defeat, he heard someone coming up behind him. When he got closer the person
proved to be Sun Qian.
“Alas! I know not the fate of my brothers, whether they be alive or dead, and
my wife and children are lost to me! What can I do?” said Liu Bei.
Sun Qian replied, “I see nothing better than getting away to Cao Cao, whence
we may be able to plan our future moves.”
Liu Bei had no better plan to propose, and the two men directed their way to
Xuchang, choosing by-roads rather than highways. When their small supplies ran
out, they entered a village to beg. But when the people of any place heard that
Liu Bei of Yuzhou was the man who needed help, they vied with each other in
offering all that was required.
One day they sought shelter at a house whence a youth came out and made a low
obeisance. They asked his name and he gave it as Liu An, of a well known family
of hunters. Hearing who the visitor was, the hunter wished to lay before him a
dish of game, but though he sought for a long time, nothing could be found for
the table. So Liu An came home, killed his wife and prepared a portion for his
guest.
While eating Liu Bei asked, “What flesh is it?”
Liu An told him: “Wolf.”
Liu Bei knew no better and ate his fill. Next day at daylight, just as Liu Bei
was leaving, he went to the stables in the rear to get his horse and passing
through the kitchen; he saw the dead body of a woman lying on the table. The
flesh of one arm had been cut away. Quite startled he asked what this meant,
and then he knew what he had eaten the night before. He was deeply sorry at
this proof of his host’s regard and the tears rained down as he mounted his
steed at the gate.
“I wish I could go with you,” said Liu An, “but as my mother still lives,
I cannot go so far from home.”
Liu Bei thanked him and went his way. The party took the road by Liangcheng,
and as they were going out, they saw not far off a thick cloud of dust. When
the troop came nearer, they found the troops were of Cao Cao’s army, and with
them they traveled to the main camp where they found Cao Cao himself. Cao Cao
shed tears at the sad story of Liu Bei’s distress, the loss of the city, his
brothers and wives and children. When Liu Bei told him of the hunter who had
sacrificed his wife to feed them, Cao Cao sent the hunter a present of a
hundred ounces of silver as a reward.
The march then was continued to Jibei, where Xiahou Yuan welcomed them. They
heard that his brother Xiahou Dun was still ill from the wound he had received
in the eye. Cao Cao went to the sick man’s bedside to see him and had him
removed to Xuchang for skilled treatment.
Presently scouts, sent out particularly for tidings of Lu Bu, returned, saying,
“Lu Bu has allied himself with the bandits in the east, and they are
attacking Yanzhou.”
At this Cao Cao dispatched Cao Ren with three thousand soldiers to take
Xiaopei, while he, in conjunction with Liu Bei, moved against Lu Bu.
They went east. As they reached the Mangdang Hills near Xiao Pass, they met the
a band of thirty thousand Taishan Mountains brigands barring their road. The
chieftains of the bandits were Sun Guan, Wu Dun, Yin Li, and Chang Xi who rode
out with their spears set. However, Xu Chu plunged into the battle and easily
beat them back and chased them right up to the pass.
The scouts told Lu Bu, who was then in Xuzhou, whither he had gone to start an
expedition to save Xiaopei. He left the protection of Xuzhou to Chen Gui and
set out with Chen Deng.
As Chen Deng was starting, Chen Gui said to him, “Remember the words of Cao
Cao, that the business of the east is in our hands. Now is our moment, for Lu
Bu is about to suffer defeat.”
“Father, I can look after the outside. But when Lu Bu returns beaten, you
must arrange with Mi Zhu to keep him out of the city. I shall find a means of
escape,” said Chen Deng.
“His family is here, and he has many friends. How about them?”
“I also have a scheme to settle them.”
Then Chen Deng went to see Lu Bu, to whom he said, “Xuzhou is surrounded, and
this city will be fiercely attacked. We ought to provide for possible retreat,
and I advise storing grain and money in Xiapi. We could retreat there if the
day went adversely. Why not see about this in good time?”
“Your words are indeed wise. I will also send my wives and little ones
thither,” said Lu Bu.
The family left under escort of Wei Xu and Song Xian, and with them was sent
much grain and treasures and coins.
And then the soldiers marched to the relief of the pass. About half way there
Chen Deng said, “Let me go first to reconnoiter so that you, my lord, may
advance with confidence.”
Thus Chen Deng parted company with his chief and preceded him to the pass where
he was received by Chen Gong.
Chen Deng said, “The General greatly wonders why you do not advance. He is
going to inquire into it.”
“The enemy is in great force, and we cannot be too careful,” said Chen
Gong. “We are holding the pass, and you should persuade our master to take
steps to guard Xiaopei.”
Chen Deng said, “Your words are true.”
That evening he went up to the heights from which he could see Cao Cao’s
army, which was quite close to the pass. Then he wrote three notes, tied them
to arrows, and shot them into Cao Cao’s camp.
Next day he left and hastened back to Lu Bu and said, “Those bandits are
about to give up the pass to the enemy, but I have left Chen Gong to hold it.
You had better make an attack tonight and hold him.”
“Had it not been for you, the pass would have been lost,” said Lu Bu.
Then he sent Chen Deng back to arrange a fire signal with Chen Gong for
simultaneous action.
So Chen Deng returned to Chen Gong to whom he said, “Cao Cao’s troops have
found a secret way through the pass, and I fear Xuzhou is already lost. You
ought to go back at once.”
At this the pass was abandoned, and Chen Gong began to retreat. Then Chen Deng
gave the prearranged signal.
Lu Bu saw the fire and advanced in the darkness to the relief of the pass.
Presently he met Chen Gong’s army; and as neither recognized the other in the
darkness, a fierce battle ensued. Nor was the trick discovered till daylight
came.
While these things were going on, Cao Cao had noted the signal and advanced as
fast as possible. The bandits, who alone remained to hold the pass, were easily
driven out and scattered in all directions.
When daylight came and the trick was discovered, Lu Bu and Chen Gong set off
together for Xuzhou. But when they arrived and summoned the gate, instead of
opening the doors, the guards on the wall saluted them with a thick flight of
arrows.
At the same time Mi Zhu appeared on the defense tower and shouted, “You stole
our master’s city, and now we are going to give it back to him. You will not
enter here again!”
“Where is Chen Gui?” cried Lu Bu, angrily.
“We have slain him!” was the reply.
“Where is Chen Deng?” said Lu Bu turning to Chen Gong.
“Do you still hold to your delusion, General, that you ask where this
specious rogue is?”
Lu Bu bade them search through all the ranks, but Chen Deng was not to be
found. Then they decided to go to Xiaopei. But ere they had got half way there,
suddenly appeared the troops under the command of Gao Shun and Zhang Liao.
They said, “Chen Deng came to us saying you, General, was surrounded and
wanted help, so we came at once.”
“Another trick of that false rogue!” said Lu Bu. “Surely he shall die for
this.”
They went with all speed to Xiaopei, only to see as they drew near, the ensigns
of the enemy displayed all along the walls, for the city had been taken by Cao
Ren.
While Lu Bu stood at the foot of the rampart reviling the traitor, Chen Deng
himself appeared on the wall and pointing to Lu Bu cried, “Did you think that
I, a minister of the dynasty, would serve a rebel like you?”
Lu Bu in his wrath was about to make a desperate attack, but suddenly a great
noise was heard, and an army came up behind him. It was led by no other than
Zhang Fei. Gao Shun went to engage him, but he had no chance of success. Lu Bu
then joined in the fray. Then another army appeared, and the leader this time
was Cao Cao himself, and his army rushed to the attack. Seeing that he had no
hope of victory, Lu Bu went away toward the east, with Cao Cao in pursuit. Lu
Bu’s army marched till they were worn out.
Then appeared a new force under Guan Yu. Holding his sword ready to strike,
Guan Yu called out, “Do not flee, O Lu Bu! Guan Yu is waiting for you.”
Lu Bu joined battle. He was flurried and scarcely knew what was happening. And
soon Zhang Fei came up once more. By desperate efforts Lu Bu and his troops cut
an alley through the press and got free. After this they started for Xiapi as
fast as they could travel, and Hou Cheng helped to keep the pursuers at bay and
welcomed them into the city.
So the two brothers, Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, were together again after their
separation. Both shed tears of joy as they told each other what they had seen
and suffered.
“I was on the Haizhou Road when I heard of you,” said Guan Yu. “I lost no
time in starting.”
“And I had been camped in the Mangdang Hills for a long time. It is happiness
to be together again.”
So they talked. Then they marched off together to find their elder brother, and
made their salutations with tears. In Liu Bei’s heart, sadness and joy
intermingled. Next they were presented to Cao Cao, and with him they went into
the captured Xuzhou City.
Mi Zhu soon came with the welcome news of the safety of the family. And Chen
Gui and Chen Deng came to present their salutations. A grand banquet was
prepared for the officers at which Cao Cao presided as host, and Chen Gui and
Liu Bei occupied the seats of honor to his right and left. At the close of the
banquet, Cao Cao paid the two Chens the highest compliments on their success
and rewarded them with the revenues of ten counties beside giving the son the
title of General Who Quells the Waves.
Cao Cao was very pleased with his success and at once began to scheme for the
taking of Xiapi, the sole place now left to Lu Bu, where he had taken refuge.
Cheng Yu said the course was inadvisable.
“If Lu Bu be pressed too hard, he may get clear by a desperate effort and
throw himself into the arms of our especial enemy, Yuan Shu. These two as
allies would be difficult to overcome. Rather send a capable man to guard the
South of River Huai, one able to secure you against Lu Bu on one hand and to
hold Yuan Shu on the other. Moreover the bandits are in Huashan Mountains and
still our enemies. They must be watched.”
Cao Cao replied, “I can keep the whole of Huashan Mountains, and I will
request Liu Bei to take the south.”
“Could I dare withstand your command?” said Liu Bei.
So forthwith Liu Bei, leaving Mi Zhu and Jian Yong at Xuzhou, went south,
taking in his train Guan Yu, Zhang Fei, and Sun Qian. And Cao Cao led his army
to Xiapi.
Lu Bu felt very secure in his refuge. He had good store of grain, and he had
the protection of River Si, so he sat quiet, satisfied that he could maintain
his defense. So he allowed Cao Cao’s army to approach without molestation.
“You ought to attack Cao Cao’s army as they come up, before they have time
to make camps and defenses. They will only have a fatigued army to oppose to
your fresh troops, and you will certainly defeat them.”
So said Chen Gong, but Lu Bu replied, “I have suffered too many defeats
lately to take any risk. Wait till they actually attack, and you will see them
floating away on the waters.”
So Lu Bu neglected the confidant’s advice and waited till the enemy had
settled into their camp. This done, the attackers advanced against the city.
From the foot of the wall, Cao Cao called to Lu Bu to listen while he spoke. Lu
Bu ascended to the wall where he stood.
Cao Cao addressed him, saying, “When I heard that your family and that of
Yuan Shu were likely to be united by marriage, I sent an army against you. Yuan
Shu was guilty of treason, while you had to your credit on the destruction of
Dong Zhuo. For what reason have you sacrificed all your merits to throw in your
lot with a rebel? It will be over late to regret when this city shall have
fallen. But if you surrender and help me to support the ruling house, you shall
not lose your rank.”
Lu Bu replied, “If the Prime Minister will retire, we may be able to discuss
the matter.”
But Chen Gong, standing near his master, began to rail at Cao Cao for a rebel
and shot an arrow that struck his plumed helmet.
“My oath, but I will slay you at least!” cried Cao Cao, pointing his finger
at Chen Gong.
Then the attack on the walls began.
“They have come from far and cannot maintain this for long,” said Chen
Gong. “General, go out with your horse and foot and take up a position
outside, leaving me to maintain the defense with the remainder of our troops.
If he engages you, I will come out and strike at his rear ranks; if he attacks
the city, you can come to our aid. In ten days their stores will fail, and we
can beat them off. This will place them between the ox-horns.”
“The advice seems good,” said Lu Bu.
Lu Bu went back to his palace and prepared his weapons. As it was the depth of
winter, he made his army take plenty of wadded clothing to keep them warm. Lady
Yan, his wife, heard of it and came to ask whither he was going. He told her of
Chen Gong’s plan.
She said, “My lord, you are leaving an undamaged city, abandoning your wife
and little ones, and going with a paltry force. Should any untoward event
happen, will your handmaid and her lord ever meet again?”
Lu Bu hesitated and for three days made no move.
Then Chen Gong came to see him again and said, “The enemy are all round the
city; and unless you go out soon, you will be quite hemmed in.”
“I am thinking it would be better to maintain a stubborn defense,” said Lu
Bu.
“Our enemies are short of food and have sent for supplies to Xuchang. These
will soon arrive, and you should go out with some veterans and intercept the
convoy. That loss would be a heavy blow.”
Lu Bu agreed and went in to tell his wife the new plan.
She wept saying, “If you go, do you think Chen Gong and others equal to the
defense of the city? Should anything go wrong, you would be very sorry. You
abandoned me at Changan, and it was only through the fortunate kindness of Pang
Shu that I was hidden from our enemies and rejoined you. Who would have thought
you would leave me again? But go, go your way as far as you wish, and do not
mind your wife.”
And she wept bitterly.
Lu Bu very sadly went to take leave of Diao Chan who said, “You are my lord
and my life. You must not be careless and ride out alone.”
“You need not fear. With my mighty trident halberd and Red Hare, who dare
come near me?”
He went out. But when he met Chen Gong, he said, “That story about supplies
for Cao Cao is all false, one of his many ruses. I am not going to stir.”
Chen Gong sighed. He felt all was lost.
“We shall die, and no one shall know our burial place,” said he.
Thereupon Lu Bu remained in his own quarters with his ladies, drinking freely
to dissipate his sorrows.
Two of his advisers, Xu Si and Wang Kai, went in and proposed, “Yuan Shu in
the South of River Huai is very powerful. Why not write to him to renew the
marriage alliance? Yuan Shu can hardly refuse to rescue the affianced bride of
his son.”
So Lu Bu wrote and bade these two take the letter.
Xu Si said, “You ought to send a strong escort with us to force a way
through.”
So Lu Bu told off one thousand troops and two of his generals, Zhang Liao and
He Meng, to conduct his messenger beyond the pass. They started that same night
at the second watch, Zhang Liao leading and He Meng bringing up the rear. They
got out of the city, crept past Liu Bei’s camp, and got beyond the danger
zone. Then half the escort went on, and Zhang Liao led the remainder back
toward the city. At the pass he found Guan Yu waiting. However, at that moment
Gao Shun came to his help, and they all returned and reentered the gates.
The two messengers presently reached Shouchun, saw Yuan Shu, and presented the
letter.
“How is this?” said Yuan Shu. “Formerly he slew my messenger and
repudiated the marriage. Now he sends to ask for it.”
“It is all due to the vile plans of that monster Cao Cao. If pray you,
Illustrious Sir, consider it carefully,” replied Xu Si.
“But if your master was not hemmed in by his enemy and in imminent danger, he
would never have thought of renewing this proposal of marriage.”
The messengers said, “You may decide not to help him, but the teeth are cold
when the lips are gone. It will not make for your happiness and comfort.”
Said Yuan Shu, “Lu Bu is unreliable. Tell him that I will send soldiers after
the girl has arrived here.”
This was final, and the two messengers took leave and headed back to Xiapi.
When the party reached Liu Bei’s camp, Xu Si decided, “We must wait the
night falls, and Wang Kai and I will try to get through in the darkness. The
escort of He Meng remaining behind to protect our rear.”
They tried that very night, and the two messengers crept across without
discovery. But the escort found themselves faced by Zhang Fei. He Meng tried to
fight but was captured in the very first bout, and the five hundred troops of
his half company were either killed or they fled.
The prisoner was taken to Liu Bei, who forwarded him to the main camp. There he
told the story of the marriage and the scheme to save the city. Cao Cao was
angry and ordered the execution of He Meng at the main gate.
Then Cao Cao sent orders to each camp to exercise the greatest diligence with
threats of rigorous punishment of the officers of any corps that permitted any
communication between the besieged and the outer world.
Every soldier felt mightily afraid.
Liu Bei returned to camp and cautioned his brothers, saying, “We are in the
most important place with regard to the South of River Huai, and you must be
very careful not to allow any breach of this command.”
Zhang Fei was inclined to grumble, saying, “We have just captured one of the
enemy’s leaders, and there is no word of praise or reward for us: Nothing but
new orders and threats. What do you make of that?”
“You are wrong to complain,” said Liu Bei. “These are orders of the
Commander-in-Chief, and what would happen were there no orders? Do not disobey
them, brother.”
They promised obedience and withdrew. In the meantime Xu Si and Wang Kai had
got back to Lu Bu and told him what Yuan Shu had said, that if the girl came
the soldiers should go.
“But how can she be sent?” said Lu Bu.
Xu Si said, “That is the difficulty. He Meng’s capture means that Cao Cao
knows the whole plan of getting help from the South of River Huai. I do not see
how anyone but you yourself could hope to get through the close siege.”
“Suppose we tried, today?” said Lu Bu.
“This is an ill-omened day. You must not try today. Tomorrow is a very lucky
day, especially in the evening, for any military action.”
Then Lu Bu ordered Zhang Liao and Gao Shun, “Get ready three thousand troops
for the venture, and prepare a light carriage. I will lead the first seventy
miles, thence you can escort the bride-elect the remainder of the way to her
new home.”
Next evening toward the second watch, Lu Bu wrapped up his daughter in soft
wadded garments, bound her about with a mailed coat, and took her on his back.
Then with his mighty trident halberd in hand, he mounted Red Hare and rode at
the head of the cavalcade out of the city gate. Zhang Liao and Gao Shun
followed.
In this order they approached Liu Bei’s camp. The drums at once beat the
alarm, and Guan Yu and Zhang Fei barred the way.
“Stop!” they shouted.
Lu Bu had no desire to fight; all he wished was to get through, so he made for
a side road. Liu Bei came in pursuit and the two parties engaged. Brave as he
might be, Lu Bu was almost helpless now that he was hampered by a girl on his
shoulders, whom he was desperately anxious to preserve from hurt. Beside other
parties came up all shouting and attacking, and he had no alternative but to
give up his project and return into the city of Xiapi. He reached his palace
very sad at heart. The besiegers returned to camp well pleased that no one had
got beyond their lines.
Lu Bu found consolation in the wine cup. The siege had gone on for two months,
and still the city stood. Then they heard that Zhang Yang, Governor of Henei,
had been inclined to come to the help of Lu Bu. But one of his subordinates,
Yang Chou, had assassinated him and was bringing his head as an offering to Cao
Cao, when Yang Chou had also been slain by Kui Gu, one of the Governor’s
adherents. Kui Gu had then led the force to Daicheng.
In the camp of the besiegers, there now arose much murmuring. Cao Cao sent Shi
Huan to intercept and kill Kui Gu.
Then he called a counsel, saying, “Though Zhang Yang, who meant to hurt us,
is happily no more, yet we are threatened on the north by Yuan Shao, and on the
west Liu Biao and Zhang Xiu are a menace. Here we meet with no success against
the city of Xiapi. We are for leaving Lu Bu to his fate and returning home.
What do you think?”
Among them Xun You fought against the idea, saying, “You must not act like
this. Lu Bu has lost much, and his spirit is broken. The spirit of the leader
expresses that of his army; and when the leader fails, his soldiers do not
fight. Chen Gong is clever, but nothing is done. Lu Bu broken, Chen Gong
without decision, it only needs a sharp attack, and we shall succeed.”
“I have a plan to propose,” said Guo Jia, “a plan to overcome the city at
once. It is better than two hundred thousand troops.”
“I suppose you mean drowning the city by River Si and River Yi,” said Xun
Yu.
“That is it,” said Guo Jia, smiling.
Cao Cao accepted the suggestion with joy and set his troops to cut the banks of
River Yi and River Si, and moved his army to the high ground whence they
watched the drowning out of Xiapi. Only the east gate remained clear of water.
The besieged soldiers hastened to their leader.
Lu Bu said, “Why should I fear? My good horse can go as well through the
water as over the land.”
And he again returned to the wine cup for consolation, drinking deeply with his
wife and concubine.
The continual drinking bouts told at last, and Lu Bu began to look dissipated.
Seeing himself in a mirror one day, he was startled at the change and said to
himself, “I am injuring myself with wine. No more from this day forward!”
He then issued an order that no one should drink wine under penalty of death.
Now one of his generals, Hou Cheng, lost fifteen horses, stolen by one of his
subordinates, Hou Cao, who intended to resell them to Liu Bei. Hou Cheng found
out where the horses were, went out after them, and recovered them after
killing Hou Cao. And Hou Cheng’s colleagues congratulated him on his success.
To celebrate the occasion, Hou Cheng brewed a few barrels of wine to be drunk
at the feast.
But thinking his chief might find him in fault, Hou Cheng sent the bottles of
wine to Lu Bu’s palace with a petition explaining, “By your virtue of
warlike renown, I have recovered my horses; and as my comrades come with their
congratulations, I brew some bottles of wine, first to offer Your Lordship and
second to ask your permission to have a little wine at the feast.”
Lu Bu took it very angrily, saying, “When I have forbidden all wine, you brew
some and begin to give feasts: You are simply defying me!”
Whereupon he ordered the officer to instant execution. However, Song Xian, Wei
Xu, and other officers came in and interceded, and after a time Lu Bu softened.
“You ought to lose your head for this disobedience. But for the sake of your
colleagues, the punishment shall be reduced to a hundred strokes.”
They tried to beg him off this, but only succeeded in reducing the number of
blows to one half.
When the sentence had been carried out and Hou Cheng was permitted to return
home, his colleagues came sadly to console him.
“Had it not been for you, I should have been put to death,” said Hou Cheng.
Song Xian replied, “All Lu Bu cares for is his family. There is no pity for
anyone else. We are no more than the weeds by the roadside.”
Wei Xu said, “The city is besieged; the water is drowning us out. There will
not be much more of this, for we may die any day.”
“He is a beast, with neither a sense of humanity nor of right. Let us leave
him,” said Song Xian.
“He is not worth fighting for. The best we could do would be to seize him and
hand him over to Cao Cao,” said Wei Xu.
“I was punished because I got my horses back again, yet all he trusts in is
his own Red Hare. If you two will betray the gate and seize Lu Bu, I will steal
the horse and go out to Cao Cao’s camp.”
They settled how to carry out the plot, and that very night Hou Cheng sneaked
into the stables and got Red Hare away. He hastened to the east gate which was
opened to let him through. The guard made a pretense of pursuing him but only a
pretense.
Hou Cheng reached the besiegers’ camp, presented the horse and told Cao Cao
what had been arranged. They would show a white flag and open the gates to his
army. Hearing this Cao Cao had a few notifications written out, which were
attached to arrows and shot over the walls. This is one of them:
“Regent Marshal Cao Cao has received a command from the Emperor to destroy Lu
Bu. Those who interfere with the operations of his grand army, whatever their
rank, shall be put to death in the gate on the day that the city shall be
captured. Should anyone capture Lu Bu or bring his head, he shall be well
rewarded. Let all take note of this.”
Next day at daylight a tremendous hubbub was heard without the city and Lu Bu,
halberd in hand, hasted to the wall to see what it meant. As he went from gate
to gate inspecting the defenses and guards, he censured Wei Xu for letting Hou
Cheng escape and get away with his horse. Lu Bu threatened to punish Wei Xu.
But just then the besiegers began a fierce attack as the white flag had just
appeared, and Lu Bu had to turn all his energies to defense. The assault lasted
till noon, when the attacking force drew off for a time.
Lu Bu was taking a rest in the tower and fell asleep in his chair. Song Xian
sent away Lu Bu’s attendants. When they had gone, he stole Lu Bu’s weapon,
the trident halberd in which he trusted. Then Song Xian and Wei Xu fell upon Lu
Bu together and before he was well awake had bound him with cords, trussing him
so that he could not move. Lu Bu shouted for his guards, but they were driven
off by the two traitor generals and could not come near. Then a white flag was
shown, and the besiegers again approached the city.
The traitors shouted out, “Lu Bu has been captured alive!”
But Xiahou Yuan could hardly believe it till they threw down the famous
halberd. The gates were flung open, and the enemy entered the city. Gao Shun
and Zhang Liao, who were at the opposite gate, were surrounded and cut off by
the water and helpless. They were captured. Chen Gong made a dash to the south
gate but was also taken by Xu Huang. Presently Cao Cao entered and at once gave
orders to turn the streams back into their usual courses. He put out
proclamations to sooth the people.
Cao Cao and Liu Bei, with Guan Yu and Zhang Fei behind, seated themselves side
by side in the White Gate Tower. The captives were brought before them. Lu Bu
looked a pitiable object. Although a very tall man, he was tied up in a
veritable ball.
“The bonds are very tight,” cried he, “I beseech you to loosen them!”
“Binding a tiger must bind tight, of course,” replied Cao Cao.
Seeing Hou Cheng, Song Xian, and Wei Xu standing there looking pleased at their
success, Lu Bu said, “I treated you all well enough: How could you turn
against me?”
Said Song Xian, “You listened to the words of your women, but rejected the
advice of your generals. Was not that mean?”
Lu Bu was silent. Then Gao Shun was brought forward.
“What have you to say?” asked Cao Cao.
Gao Shun sulkily held his tongue. He was ordered out to execution.
Next Chen Gong was led in.
“I hope you have been well since we last saw each other, Chen Gong?” said
Cao Cao.
“Your ways were crooked, and so I left you,” said Chen Gong.
“You say I was crooked; and what of your serving Lu Bu?”
“Though he was a fool, he did not resemble you in deceit and wickedness.”
“You say you are able enough and clever, but what about your position
today?”
Turning toward Lu Bu, Chen Gong said, “This man would not follow my advice.
Had he done so, he would not now be a captive.”
“What think you ought to be done about this day’s work?” said Cao Cao.
“There is death for me today, and that is the end!” said Chen Gong
undauntedly.
“Very well for you; but what of your mother and wife and children?”
“It is said that one who rules with due regard to filial piety does not harm
a person’s family; one who would show benevolence does not cut off the
sacrifices at a person’s tomb. My mother and wife and children are in your
hands. But since I am your prisoner, I pray you slay me quickly and not to try
to harrow my feelings.”
Cao Cao’s heart still leaned toward mercy, but Chen Gong turned and walked
away, repulsing the attendants who would stop him. Cao Cao rose from his place
and walked with Chen Gong, the tears falling from his eyes. Chen Gong never
looked at him.
Turning to his guards Cao Cao said, “Let his mother and family be taken to
Xuchang and looked after immediately. Any postponement will be punished!”
The condemned man heard him but uttered no word. He stretched out his neck for
the blow. Tears sprang to the eyes of all present. His remains were honorably
coffined and buried in Xuchang.
A poem pitying Chen Gong’s fate says:
Neither hope of life nor fear of death moved him.
How brave was he, a hero indeed!
But his lord heeded not his words,
Wherefore in vain possessed he great talents.
Nevertheless, in that he stood by his master.
To parting with wife and mother,
He merits our pity and profound respect.
Who would resemble Chen Gong
That day he died at the White Gate Tower?
While Cao Cao sadly escorted Chen Gong on the way to death, Lu Bu appealed to
Liu Bei, “Noble Sir, you sit there an honored guest while poor I lie bound at
your feet. Will you not utter one word to alleviate my lot?”
Liu Bei nodded.
As Cao Cao returned to his place, Lu Bu called out, “Your only trouble,
Illustrious Sir, is myself, and I am on your side now. You take the lead, I
will help you, and together the world is at our feet.”
“What do you think?” said Cao Cao turning to Liu Bei.
“You are willing to forget the episodes of Ding Yuan and Dong Zhuo?”
“Truly the lout is not to be trusted!” said Lu Bu, looking at Liu Bei.
“Strangle and expose!” ordered Cao Cao.
As he was led away, Lu Bu turned once more to Liu Bei, “You long-eared lout,
you forget now the service I rendered you that day at my camp gate, when my
arrow hit the mark!”
Just then someone shouted, “Lu Bu, O fool! Death is but death, and why are
you scared at it?”
Everyone turned to look: The guards were hustling Zhang Liao to the place of
judgment. Cao Cao ordered Lu Bu’s execution.
A poet has written upon the death of Lu Bu:
The flood spreads wide, the city drowns,
Its lord is captive. Nought avails
His courser’s speed or halberd’s thrust.
The tiger erstwhile fierce, now whines
For mercy. Cao Cao had meted him
Full well, a falcon flown at will
And hungry kept. Poor fool! He let
Chen Gong’s advice be overborne
By harem tattle; vainly now
He rails against the Long-Ears’ faith.
And another poem says:
Round is the hungry tiger, eater of men, for whom is no pity,
Since the blood of his victims is fresh and not yet dry.
Liu Bei spoke no word in favor of Lu Bu,
To whom even a father’s life was not sacred.
It was recorded earlier that the executioners were hustling Zhang Liao forward.
Pointing to him from above, Cao Cao said, “He has a familiar face.”
“You were not likely to forget me: You saw me before in Puyang,” said Zhang
Liao.
“O, so you remember me, eh?”
“Yes. More is the pity.”
“Pity for what?”
“That the fire that day was not fierce enough to burn you up, rebel that you
are!”
Cao Cao began to get angry.
“How dare you insult me?” cried he and lifted his sword to kill the bold
speaker.
The undaunted Zhang Liao never changed color, but stretched out his neck for
the blow. Then a man behind Cao Cao caught his arm, and in front of him another
dropped on his knees, saying, “O Prime Minister, I pray thee stay thy
hand!”
Lu Bu whining was not spared,
Railing Zhang Liao far better fared.
Who was it that saved Zhang Liao? The next chapter will show.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 20 ****
The last chapter said that Cao Cao was checked in his angry attack upon Zhang
Liao. They were Liu Bei who held his arm and Guan Yu who knelt before him.
“A man as generous-hearted as he is should be saved,” said Liu Bei.
Guan Yu said, “I know him well as loyal and righteous. I will vouch for him
with my own life!”
Cao Cao threw aside his sword and smiled.
“I also know Zhang Liao to be loyal and good. I was just testing him,” said
he.
Cao Cao loosed the prisoner’s bonds with his own hands, had a change of dress
brought in, and clothed him therewith. Then he was led to a seat of honor. This
kindly treatment sank deep into Zhang Liao’s heart, and he hastened to
declare formally that he yielded. And then he was given the rank of Imperial
Commander and the title of Lordship.
Zhang Liao was sent on a mission to win over the bandit leader Zang Ba, who
hearing what had happened, came forthwith and gave in his submission. He was
graciously received, and his former colleagues —-Sun Guan, Wu Dun, and Yin Li
—-also yielded, with the exception of Chang Xi, who remained obdurate. All
these former enemies who came over were kindly treated and given posts of
responsibility wherein they might prove the reality of their conversion. Lu
Bu’s family were sent to the capital.
After the soldiers had been rewarded with feasting, the camp was broken up and
the army moved away to Xuchang. Passing through Xuzhou the people lined the
roads and burned incense in honor of the victors. They also petitioned that Liu
Bei should be their protector.
Cao Cao replied, “Liu Bei has rendered great services. You must wait till he
has been received in audience and obtained his reward. After that he shall be
sent here.”
The people bowed low to the ground to express their thanks. Che Zhou, General
of the Flying Cavalry, was given command of Xuzhou for the moment.
After the army had arrived at the capital, rewards were granted to all the
officers who had been in the expedition. Liu Bei was retained in the capital,
lodging in an annex to the Prime Minister’s palace.
Next day a court was held, and Cao Cao memorialized the services of Liu Bei who
was presented to Emperor Xian. Dressed in court robes, Liu Bei bowed at the
lower end of the audience arena. The Emperor called him to the Hall and asked
his ancestry.
Liu Bei replied, “Thy servant is the son of Liu Hong, grandson of Liu Xiong,
who was a direct descendant of Prince Sheng of Zhongshan, who was the son of
His Majesty the Emperor Jing (reigned BC 157-141).”
The Emperor bade them bring forth the Books of the Genealogies, and therefrom a
secretary read:
“Liu Jing the Filial Emperor begot fourteen sons of whom the seventh was Liu
Sheng, Prince of Zhongshan. Sheng begot Liu Zhen, Lord of Luchang. Zhen begot
Liu Ang, Lord of Pei. Ang begot Liu Lu, Lord of Zhang. Lu begot Liu Lian, Lord
of Yishui. Lian begot Liu Ying, Lord of Qinyang. Ying begot Liu Jian, Lord of
Anguo. Jian begot Liu Ai, Lord of Guangling. Ai begot Liu Xia, Lord of
Jiaoshui. Xia begot Liu Shu, Lord of Zuyi. Shu begot Liu Yi, Lord of Qiyang. Yi
begot Liu Bi, Lord of Yuanze. Bi begot Liu Da, Lord of Yingchuan. Da begot Liu
Buyi, Lord of Fengling. Buyi begot Liu Hui, Lord of Jichuan. Hui begot Liu
Xiong, Governor of Zhuo. Xiong begot Liu Hong, who held no office or rank; and
Liu Bei is his son.”
The Emperor compared this with the registers of the Imperial House and found by
them that Liu Bei was his uncle by descent. The Emperor seemed greatly pleased
and requested Liu Bei to go into one of the side chambers where he might
perform the ceremonial obeisance prescribed for a nephew to his uncle. In his
heart he rejoiced to have this heroic warrior uncle as a powerful supporter
against Cao Cao who really held all the power in his own hands. The Emperor
knew himself to be a mere puppet. He conferred upon his uncle the rank of
General of the Left Army and the title of Lord of Yicheng.
When the banquet was concluded, Liu Bei thanked the Emperor and went out of the
Palace. And from this time he was very generally styled the “Imperial
Uncle.”
When Cao Cao returned to his palace, Xun Yu and his fellow advisers went in to
see him.
Xun Yu said, “It is no advantage to you, Illustrious Sir, that the Emperor
recognizes Liu Bei as an uncle.”
“Liu Bei may be recognized as uncle, but he is under my orders since I
control the decrees of the Throne. He will be all the more ready to obey.
Beside I will keep him here under the pretense of having him near his
sovereign, and he will be entirely in my hands. I have nothing to fear. The man
I fear is Yang Biao, who is a relative of the two Yuan brothers. Should Yang
Biao conspire with them, he is an enemy within and might do much harm. He will
have to be removed.”
Hence Cao Cao sent a secret emissary to say that Imperial Guardian Yang Biao
was intriguing with Yuan Shu, and on this charge Yang Biao was arrested and
imprisoned. And his death would have been compassed had his enemy dared.
But just then the Governor of Beihai, Kong Rong, was at the capital, and he
remonstrated with Cao Cao, saying, “Yang Biao comes from a family famed for
virtue for at least four generations. You cannot trump up so foolish a charge
as that against him.”
“It is the wish of His Majesty!” retorted Cao Cao.
“If the child Emperor Cheng of Zhou Dynasty had put Duke Chao to death, could
the people have believed Duke Zhou, the Regent Marshal, had nothing to do with
it?”
So Cao Cao had to relinquish the attempt, but he took away Yang Biao’s
offices and banished him to his family estate in the country.
Court Counselor Zhao Yan, an opponent of the Prime Minister, sent up a memorial
impeaching Cao Cao for having removed a minister of state from office without a
decree. Cao Cao’s reply to this was the arrest of Zhao Yan and his execution,
a bold stroke which terrified the bulk of officers and reduced them to silence.
Cheng Yu advised Cao Cao to assume a more definite position. He said,
“Illustrious Sir, your prestige grows daily. Why not seize the opportunity to
take the position of Chief of the Feudatory Princes?”
“There are still too many supporters of the court,” was the reply. “I
must be careful. I am going to propose a royal hunt to try to find out the best
line to follow.”
This expedition being decided upon they got together fleet horses, famous
falcons, and pedigree hounds, and prepared bows and arrows in readiness. They
mustered a strong force of guards outside the city.
When the Prime Minister proposed the hunting expedition, the Emperor said he
feared it was an improper thing to do.
Cao Cao replied, “In ancient times rulers made four expeditions yearly at
each of the four seasons in order to show their strength. They were called Sou,
Miao, Xien, and Shou, in the order of spring, summer, autumn, and winter. Now
that the whole country is in confusion, it would be wise to inaugurate a hunt
in order to train the army. I am sure Your Majesty will approve.”
So the Emperor with the full paraphernalia for an imperial hunt joined the
expedition. He rode a saddled horse, carried an inlaid bow, and his quiver was
filled with gold-tipped arrows. His chariot followed behind. Liu Bei and his
brothers were in the imperial train, each with his bow and quiver. Each party
member wore a breastplate under the outer robe and held his especial weapon,
while their escort followed them. Cao Cao rode a dun horse called “Flying-
Lightning,” and the army was one hundred thousand strong.
The hunt took place in Xutian, and the legions spread out as guards round the
hunting arena which extended over some one hundred square miles. Cao Cao rode
even with the Emperor, the horses’ heads alternating in the lead. The
imperial attendants immediately following were all in Cao Cao’s confidence.
The other officers, civil and military, lagged behind, for they dared not press
forward into the midst of Cao Cao’s partisans.
One day the Emperor was riding toward the hunting grounds and noticed his newly
found uncle respectfully standing by the roadside.
“I should like to see my uncle display his hunting skill,” said the
Emperor.
Liu Bei mounted his steed at once. Just then a hare started from its form. Liu
Bei shot and hit it with the first arrow.
The Emperor, much struck by this display, rode away over a slope. Suddenly a
deer broke out of the thicket. He shot three arrows at it but all missed.
“You try,” said the Emperor turning to Cao Cao.
“Lend me Your Majesty’s bow,” Cao Cao replied.
Taking the inlaid bow and the golden-tipped arrows, Cao Cao pulled the bow and
hit the deer in the shoulder at the first shot. It fell in the grass and could
not run.
Now the crowd of officers seeing the golden-barbed arrow sticking in the wound
concluded at once that the shot was the Emperor’s, so they rushed up and
shouted “Wan shui! O Son of Heaven! Live forever!”
Cao Cao rode out pushing past the Emperor and acknowledged the congratulations.
They all turned pale. Guan Yu, who was behind Liu Bei, was especially angry.
The silkworm eyebrows stood up fiercely, and the red phoenix eyes glared as,
sword in hand, he rode hastily forth to cut down the audacious Prime Minister
for his impertinence.
However, Liu Bei hastily waved him back and shot at him a meaning glance so
that Guan Yu stopped and made no further move.
Liu Bei bowing toward Cao Cao said, “Most sincere felicitations! A truly
supernatural shot, such as few have achieved!”
“It is only the enormous good fortune of the Son of Heaven!” said Cao Cao
with a smile.
Then he turned his steed and felicitated the Emperor. But he did not return the
bow; he hung it over his own shoulder instead.
The hunt finished with banqueting; and when the entertainments were over, they
returned to the capital, all glad of some repose after the expedition.
Guan Yu was still angry of the Prime Minister’s breach of decorum.
One day Guan Yu said to Liu Bei, “Brother, why did you prevent me from
killing that rebel and so ridding the world of a scoundrel? He insults the
Emperor and ignores everybody else.”
“When you throw stones at a rat, beware of the vase,” quoted Liu Bei.
“Cao Cao was only a horse’s head away from Our Lord, and in the midst of a
crowd of his partisans. In that momentary burst of anger, if you had struck and
failed, and harm had come to the Emperor, what an awful crime would have been
laid to us!”
“If we do not rid the world of him today, a worse evil will come of it,”
said Guan Yu.
“But be discreet, my brother. Such matters cannot be lightly discussed.”
The Emperor sadly returned to his palace. With tears in his eyes, he related
what had occurred in the hunt to his consort, Empress Fu.
“Alas for me!” said he. “From the first days of my accession, one vicious
minister has succeeded another. I was the victim of Dong Zhuo’s evil
machinations. Then followed the rebellion of Li Jue and Guo Si. You and I had
to bear sorrows such as no others have borne. Then came this Cao Cao as one who
would maintain the imperial dignity, but he has seized upon all real authority
and does as he wishes. He works continually for his own glorification, and I
never see him but my back pricks. These last few days in the hunting field, he
went in front of me and acknowledged the cheers of the crowd. He is so
extremely rude that I feel sure he has sinister designs against me. Alas, my
wife, we know not when our end may come!”
“In a whole court full of nobles, who have eaten the bread of Han, is there
not one who will save his country?” said she.
Thus spoke the Empress, and at the same moment there stepped in a man who said,
“Grieve not, O Imperial Pair! I can find a savior for the country.”
It was none other than the father of the Empress, Fu Wan.
“Have you heard of Cao Cao’s wanton and perverse behavior?” said the
Emperor, drying his eyes.
“You mean the deer shooting? Who did not see that, indeed? But the whole
court is full of his clan or his creatures. With the exception of the relatives
of your Consort, there is not one loyal enough to deal with a rebel. I have no
authority and can do nothing, but there is General Dong Cheng, the State Uncle,
who could do it.”
“Could Uncle Dong Cheng come in to consult about this? I know he has had much
experience of state troubles.”
Fu Wan replied, “Everyone of your attendants is a partisan of Cao Cao, and
this sort of thing must be kept most profoundly secret or the consequence will
be most serious.”
“Then what can be done?” said the Emperor.
“The only plan I can think of is to send gifts of a robe and a jade girdle to
Dong Cheng, and in the lining of the girdle hide a secret edict authorizing him
to take certain steps. When he gets home and has read the edict, he can
elaborate plans as quickly as possible, and neither the spirits above nor the
demons below will know anything about them.”
The Emperor approved, and Fu Wan went out. The Emperor then with his own hand
drew up a decree, writing it with blood drawn by biting his finger. He gave the
document to Empress Fu to sew into the purple lining of the girdle. When all
was done, he put on the robe and girded it with the girdle. Next he bade one of
the attendants summon State Uncle Dong Cheng to the Palace.
Dong Cheng came; and after the ceremonies were finished, the Emperor said, “A
few nights ago I was talking with the Empress of the terrible days of the
rebellion, and we thought of your good services then, therefore we have called
you in to reward you.”
The minister bowed his head in thanks. Then the Emperor led Dong Cheng out of
the Reception Hall to the Temple of Ancestors, and they went to the gallery of
Worthy Ministers, where the Emperor burned incense and performed the usual
ceremonies. After this they went to see the portraits, and among them was one
of the founder of the dynasty, Liu Bang the Supreme Ancestor.
“Whence sprang our great ancestor, and how did he begin his great
achievement?” said the Emperor.
“Your Majesty is pleased to joke with thy servant,” said Dong Cheng, rather
startled at the question. “Who does not know the deeds of the Sacred
Ancestor? He began life as a minor official in Sishang. There gripping his
sword, he slew a white serpent, the beginning of his struggle for the right.
Speedily he mastered the empire: In three years had destroyed Qin and, in five,
also Chu. Thus he set up a dynasty that shall endure forever!”
“Such heroic forefathers! Such weakling descendants! How sad it is!” said
the Emperor.
Pointing to the portraits right and left, he continued, “Are not these two
Zhang Liang, Lord of Liu, and Xiao He, Lord of Cuo?”
“Certainly. The Supreme Ancestor was greatly assisted by these two.”
The Emperor glanced right and left. His attendants were rather far away. Then
he whispered to Dong Cheng, “You, like these two, must stand by me.”
“My poor services are of no worth. I do not compare with those men,” said
the Uncle.
“I remember that you saved me at the western capital, Changan. I have never
forgotten, and I could never reward you properly.”
Then pointing to his own robe, the Emperor continued, “You must wear this
robe of mine, girded with my own girdle, and it will be as though you are
always near your Emperor.”
Dong Cheng bowed his gratitude while the Emperor, taking off the robe,
presented it to his faithful minister. At the same time he whispered,
“Examine it closely when you get home, and help your Emperor carry out his
intention.”
Dong Cheng understood. He put on the robe and the girdle, took leave and left
the chamber.
The news of the audience for Dong Cheng had been taken to the Prime Minister,
who at once went to the Palace and arrived as Dong Cheng was passing out at the
Donghua Gate. They met face to face, and Dong Cheng could in nowise avoid him.
Dong Cheng went to the side of the road and made his obeisance.
“Where are you from, State Uncle?” asked Cao Cao.
“His Majesty summoned me into the Palace and has given me this robe and
beautiful girdle.”
“Why did he give you these?”
“He had not forgotten that I saved his life in the old days.”
“Take it off and let me see it.”
Dong Cheng who knew that a secret decree was hidden away somewhere in the
garments was afraid Cao Cao would notice a breach somewhere in the material, so
he hesitated and did not obey. But Cao Cao called his guards, and they took off
the girdle. Then Cao Cao looked it over carefully.
“It certainly is a very handsome girdle,” said he. “Now take off the robe
and let me look at that.”
Dong Cheng’s heart was melting with fear, but he dared not disobey. So he
handed over the robe. Cao Cao took it and held it up against the sun with his
own hand and minutely examined every part of it.
When he had done this, he put it on, girded it with the girdle and turning to
his attendants said, “How is it for length?”
“Beautiful!” they chorused.
Turning to Dong Cheng, he said, “Will you give these to me?”
“My Prince’s presents to me I dare not give to another. Let me give you
another robe in its stead,” said Dong Cheng.
“Is there not some intrigue connected with these presents? I am sure there
is,” said Cao Cao.
“How could I dare?” said Dong Cheng, trembling. “If you are so set upon
it, then I must give it up.”
“How could I take away what our Prince has given you? It was all a joke,”
said the Prime Minister.
Cao Cao returned both robe and girdle, and their owner made the best of his way
home. When night came and he was alone in his library, he took out the robe and
looked over every inch of it most carefully. He found nothing.
“He gave me a robe and a girdle and bade me look at them carefully. That
means there is something to be looked for but I can find no trace of it. What
does it mean?” he soliloquized.
Then he lifted the girdle and examined that. The jade plates were carved into
the semblance of small dragons interlaced among flowers. The lining was of
purple silk. All was sewn together most carefully and neatly, and he could find
nothing out of the common. He was puzzled. He laid the belt on the table.
Presently he picked it up and looked at it again. He spent long hours over it
but in vain. He leaned over on the small table, his head resting on his hands
and was almost asleep, when a candle snuff fell down upon the girdle and burned
a hole in the lining. He hastily shook it off, but the mischief was done: A
small hole had been burned in the silken lining, and through this there
appeared something white with blood red marks. He hastily ripped it open and
drew out the decree written by the hand of the Emperor himself in characters of
blood. It read:
“Of human relationships, that between parents and children stands first. Of
the various social ties that between prince and minister stands highest. Today
Cao Cao, the wicked, is a real tyrant, treating even his Prince with indignity.
With the support of his faction and his army, he has destroyed the principles
of government. By conferring rewards and inflicting punishments, he has reduced
the Emperor to a nonentity. I have grieved over this day and night. I have
feared the empire would be ruined.
“You are a high minister of state and my own relative. You must recall the
difficulties of the Great Founder’s early days and draw together the loyal
and right-minded to destroy this evil faction and restore the prerogatives of
the Throne. Such a deed would be indeed an extreme joy to the spirits of my
ancestors.
“This decree, written in blood drawn from my own veins, is confided to a
noble who is to be most careful not to fail in executing his Emperor’s
design.
“Given in the era of Rebuilt Tranquillity, fourth year and the third month of
spring.” (AD 199)
So ran the decree, and Dong Cheng read it with streaming eyes. There was no
sleep for him that night. Early in the morning he returned to his library and
reread it. No plan suggested itself. He laid the decree down on the table and
sought in the depths of his mind for some scheme to destroy Cao Cao, but could
not decide upon any. And he fell asleep leaning over his table.
It happened that Minister Wang Zifu, with whom Dong Cheng was on terms of great
intimacy, came to visit him and, as usual, walked into the house unannounced
and went straight to the library. His host did not wake, and Wang Zifu noticed,
hardly hidden by his sleeve, the Emperor’s writing.
Wondering what this might be, Wang Zifu drew it out, read it, and put it in his
own sleeve.
Then he called out loud, “Uncle Dong Cheng, are you not well? Why are you
asleep at this time of day?”
Dong Cheng started up and at once missed the decree. He was aghast; he almost
fell to the ground.
“So you want to make away with Cao Cao? I shall have to tell him,” said
Wang Zifu.
“Then, brother, that is the end of the Hans,” said his host, with tears.
“I was joking,” said Wang Zifu. “My forefathers also served the Hans and
ate of their bounty. Am I devoid of loyalty? I would help you, brother, as far
as lies in my power.”
“It is well for the country that you think like this,” said Dong Cheng.
“But we ought to have a more private place than this to talk over such plans
and pledge ourselves to sacrifice all in the cause of Han.”
Dong Cheng began to feel very satisfied. He produced a roll of white silk and
wrote his own name at the top and signed it, and Wang Zifu followed suit.
Then the visitor said, “General Wu Zilan is one of my best friends. He ought
to be allowed to come in.”
Dong Cheng replied, “Of all the officials of the court, Commander Chong Ji
and Court Counselor Wu Shi are my best friends. Certainly they would back me
up.”
So the discussion proceeded. Presently a servant announced no other than these
very two men Dong Cheng just mentioned.
“This is providential,” said Dong Cheng, and he told Wang Zifu to hide
behind a screen.
The two guests were led into the library, and after the exchange of the
ordinary civilities and a cup of tea, Chong Ji referred to the incident at the
hunt and the shooting of the stag.
“Were you not angry at that?” said Chong Ji.
Dong Cheng answered, “Though we be angry, what can we do?”
Wu Shi struck in, saying, “I would slay this fellow, I swear, but I cannot
get anyone to back me up.”
“One should perish for one’s country; one should not mind,” said Chong
Ji.
At this moment Wang Zifu appeared from behind the screen, saying, “You two
want to kill Cao Cao! I shall have to let him know this. And Uncle Dong Cheng
is my witness.”
“A loyal minister does not mind death. If we are killed, we will be Han
ghosts, which is better than being sycophants of a traitor,” said Chong Ji,
angrily.
Dong Cheng said, “We were just saying we wanted to see you two on this
matter. Wang Zifu is only joking.”
Then he drew forth the decree and showed it to the two newcomers, who also wept
as they read it. They were asked to add their names to the silk roll.
Wang Zifu said, “Wait here a few moments till I get Wu Zilan to come.”
He left the room and very soon returned with his friend, who also wrote his
name in the presence of all the others.
After this they went into one of the inner chambers to drink success to the new
plot. While there, a new visitor, Ma Teng, Governor of Xiliang, was announced.
“Say I am indisposed,” said the host, “and cannot receive visitors.”
The doorkeeper took the message, whereat Ma Teng angrily said, “Last night at
the Donghua Gate, I saw him come out in robe and girdle. How can he pretend
illness today? I am not come from mere idleness, why does he refuse to see
me?”
The doorkeeper went in again and told his master what the visitor had said and
that he was very angry. Then Dong Cheng rose, excused himself saying he would
soon return, and went to receive Ma Teng.
After the visitor had saluted and they were both seated, Ma Teng said, “I
have just come from a farewell audience and wished to bid you good bye. Why did
you want to put me off?”
“My poor body was taken suddenly ill. That is why I was not waiting to
welcome you,” said Dong Cheng.
“You do not look as if you were ill. Your face wears the very bloom of
health,” said Ma Teng bluntly.
His host could say no more and was silent. The visitor shook out his sleeves
and rose to depart.
He sighed deeply as he walked down the steps, saying to himself, “Not one of
them is any good. There is no one to save the country.”
This speech sank deeply into Dong Cheng’s heart. He stopped his guest,
saying, “Who is no good to save the country? Whom do you mean?”
“That incident at the hunt the other day, the shooting of the stag, filled my
breast with anger. But if you, a near relative of the Emperor, can pass your
time in wine and idle dalliance without a thought of doing away with rebellion,
where can anyone be found who will save the dynasty?”
However, Dong Cheng doubts were not set at rest. Pretending great surprise, he
replied, “The Prime Minister is of high rank and has the confidence of the
court. Why then do you utter such things?”
“So you find that wretch Cao Cao a good man, eh?”
“Pray speak lower: There are eyes and ears very near us.”
“The sort of people who covet life and fear death are not those to discuss
any great undertaking.”
So saying, Ma Teng rose to go sway. By this time his host’s doubts were set
at rest. He felt that Ma Teng was loyal.
So Dong Cheng said, “Do not be angry any more. I will show you something.”
Whereupon he invited Ma Teng to go into the room where the others were seated
and then showed him the decree. As Ma Teng read it, his hair stood on end; he
ground his teeth and bit his lips till the blood came.
“When you move, remember the whole force of my army is ready to help,” said
Ma Teng.
Dong Cheng introduced him to the other conspirators, and then the pledge was
produced, and Ma Teng was told to sign his name. He did so, at the same time
smearing the blood as a sign of the oath and saying, “I swear to die rather
than betray this pledge!”
Pointing to the five he said, “We require ten for this business, and we can
accomplish our design.”
“We cannot get many true and loyal people. One of the wrong sort will spoil
all,” said Dong Cheng.
Ma Teng told them to bring in the list of officials. He read on till he came to
the name Liu, of the imperial clan, when clapping his hands he cried, “Why
not consult him?”
“Whom?” cried they altogether.
Ma Teng very slowly and deliberately spoke his name.
To a very trusty servant comes an Emperor’s decree,
And a scion of the ruling house can prove his loyalty.
If the readers turns to the next chapter, they will see whom Ma Teng talked
about.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 21 ****
“Who is it?” was the question on the lips of the conspirators.
Ma Teng’s reply was, “The Imperial Protector of Yuzhou, Liu Bei. He is here
and we will ask him to help.”
“Though he is an uncle of the Emperor, he is at present a partisan of our
enemy, and he will not join,” said Dong Cheng.
“But I saw something at the hunt,” said Ma Teng. “When Cao Cao advanced
to acknowledge the congratulations due to the Emperor, Liu Bei’s sworn
brother Guan Yu was behind him, and grasped his sword as if to cut down Cao
Cao. However, Liu Bei signed to him to hold his hand and Guan Yu did. Liu Bei
would willingly destroy Cao Cao, only he thinks Cao Cao’s teeth and claws are
too many. You must ask Liu Bei, and he will surely consent.”
Here Wu Shi urged caution, saying, “Do not go too fast. Let us consider the
thing most carefully.”
They dispersed. Next day after dark Dong Cheng went to Liu Bei’s lodging
taking with him the decree. As soon as Dong Cheng was announced, Liu Bei came
to greet him and led him into a private room where they could talk freely. The
two younger brothers were there as well.
“It must be something unusually important that has brought Uncle Dong Cheng
here tonight,” said Liu Bei.
“If I had ridden forth by daylight, Cao Cao might have suspected something,
so I came by night.”
Wine was brought in, and while they were drinking, Dong Cheng said, “Why did
you check your brother the other day at the hunt, when he was going to attack
Cao Cao?”
Liu Bei was startled and said, “How did you know?”
“Nobody noticed but I saw.”
Liu Bei could not prevaricate and said, “It was the presumption of the man
that made my brother so angry. Guan Yu could not help it.”
The visitor covered his face and wept.
“Ah,” said he, “if all the court ministers were like Guan Yu, there would
be no sighs for lack of tranquillity.”
Now Liu Bei felt that possibly Cao Cao had sent his visitor to try him, so he
cautiously replied, “Where are the sighs for lack of tranquillity while Cao
Cao is at the head of affairs?”
Dong Cheng changed color and rose from his seat.
“You, Sir, are a relative of His Majesty, and so I showed you my inmost
feelings. Why did you mislead me?”
But Liu Bei said, “Because I feared you might be misleading me, and I wanted
to find out.”
At this Dong Cheng drew out the decree he had received and showed it. His host
was deeply moved. Then Dong Cheng produced the pledge. There were only six
names to it, and these were Dong Cheng, Wang Zifu, Chong Ji, Wu Shi, Wu Zilan,
and Ma Teng.
“Since you have a decree like this, I cannot but do my share,” said Liu
Bei, and at Dong Cheng’s request he added his name and signature to the
others and handed it back.
“Now let us but get three more, which will make ten, and we shall be ready to
act.”
“But you must move with great caution and not let this get abroad,” said
Liu Bei.
The two remained talking till an early hour in the morning when the visitor
left.
Now in order to put Cao Cao quite off the scent that any plot against him was
in progress, Liu Bei began to devote himself to gardening, planting vegetables,
and watering them with his own hands. Guan Yu and Zhang Fei ventured to
remonstrate with him for taking to such an occupation when great matters needed
attention.
“The reason for this you may not know,” replied he.
And they said no more.
One day when the two brothers were absent, and Liu Bei was busy in his garden,
two generals of Cao Cao, Xu Chu and Zhang Liao, with an escort came from Cao
Cao, saying, “The command of the Prime Minister is that you come at once.”
“What important affair is afoot?” asked Liu Bei nervously.
“We know nothing. We were ordered to come and request your presence.”
All he could do was to follow.
When Liu Bei arrived, Cao Cao met him and laughingly said, “That is a big
business you have in hand at home.”
This remark made Liu Bei turn the color of clay. Cao Cao took him by the hand
and led him straight to the private garden, saying, “The growth of vegetables
that you are trying to learn is very difficult.”
Liu Bei breathed again. He said, “That is hardly a business. It is only a
solace.”
Cao Cao said, “I happened to notice the green plums on the trees today, and
suddenly my thoughts went back to a year ago when we were thrashing Zhang Xiu.
We were marching through a parched county, and everyone was suffering from
thirst. Suddenly I lifted my whip, and pointing at something in the distance I
said, ‘Look at those fruitful plum trees in the forest ahead.’ The soldiers
heard it, and it made their mouths water. Seeing the plums kindles my
appreciation. I owe something to the plums, and we will repay it today. I
ordered the servants to heat some wine very hot and sent to invite you to share
it.”
Liu Bei was quite composed by this time and no longer suspected any sinister
design. He went with his host to a small spring pavilion in a plum garden,
where the wine cups were already laid out and green plums filled the dishes.
They sat down to a confidential talk and free enjoyment of their wine.
As they drank, the weather gradually changed, clouds gathering and threatening
rain. The servants pointed out a mass of cloud that looked like a dragon hung
in the sky. Both host and guest leaned over the balcony looking at it.
“Do you understand the evolution of dragons?” asked Cao Cao of the guest.
“Not in detail.”
“A dragon can assume any size, can rise in glory or hide from sight. Bulky,
it generates clouds and evolves mist; attenuated, it can scarcely hide a
mustard stalk or conceal a shadow. Mounting, it can soar to the empyrean;
subsiding, it lurks in the uttermost depths of the ocean. This is the midspring
season, and the dragon chooses this moment for its transformations like a
person realizing his own desires and overrunning the world. The dragon among
animals compares with the hero among people. You, General, have traveled all
lakes and rivers. You must know who are the heroes of the present day, and I
wish you would say who they are.”
“I am just a common dullard. How can I know such things?”
“Do not be so modest,” said Cao Cao.
“Thanks to your kindly protection I have a post at court. But as to heroes I
really do not know who they are.”
“You may not have looked upon their faces, but you must have heard their
names.”
“Yuan Shu of the South of River Huai, with his strong army and abundant
resources: Is he one?” asked Liu Bei.
His host laughed, “A rotting skeleton in a graveyard. I shall put him out of
the way shortly.”
“Well, Yuan Shao then. The highest offices of state have been held in his
family for four generations, and his clients are many in the empire. He is
firmly posted in Jizhou, and he commands the services of many able people.
Surely he is one.”
“A bully, but a coward. He is fond of grandiose schemes, but is devoid of
decision. He makes for great things but grudges the necessary sacrifice. He
loses sight of everything else in view of a little present advantage. He is not
one.”
“There is Liu Biao of Jingzhou. He is renowned as a man of perfection, whose
fame has spread on all sides. Surely he is a hero.”
“He is a mere semblance, a man of vain reputation. No, not he.”
“Sun Ce is a sturdy sort, the chief of all in the South Land. Is he a
hero?”
“He has profited by the reputation of his father Sun Jian. Sun Ce is not a
real hero.”
“What of Liu Zhang of Yizhou?”
“Though he is of the reigning family, he is nothing more than a watch dog.
How could you make a hero of him?”
“What about Zhang Xiu, Zhang Lu, Han Sui, and all those leaders?”
Cao Cao clapped his hands and laughed very loudly, saying, “Paltry people
like them are not worth mentioning.”
“With these exceptions I really know none.”
“Now heroes are the ones who cherish lofty designs in their bosoms and have
plans to achieve them. They have all-embracing schemes, and the whole world is
at their mercy.”
“Who is such a person?” said Liu Bei.
Cao Cao pointed his finger first at his guest and then at himself, saying,
“The only heroes in the world are you and I.”
Liu Bei gasped, and the spoon and chopsticks rattled to the floor. Now just at
that moment the storm burst with a tremendous peal of thunder and rush of rain.
Liu Bei stooped down to recover the fallen articles, saying, “What a shock!
And it was quite close.”
“What! Are you afraid of thunder?” said Cao Cao.
Liu Bei replied, “The Sage One paled at a sudden peal of thunder or fierce
gust of wind. Why should one not fear?”
Thus he glossed over the real fact, that it was the words he had heard that had
so startled him.
Constrained to lodge in a tiger’s lair,
He played a waiting part,
But when Cao Cao talked of breaking humans,
Then terror gripped his heart.
But he cleverly used the thunder peal
As excuse for turning pale;
O quick to seize occasions thus!
He surely must prevail.
The shower had passed, and there appeared two men rushing through the garden,
both armed. In spite of the attendants, they forced their way to the pavilion
where sat the two friends. They were Guan Yu and Zhang Fei.
The two brothers had been outside the city at archery practice when Cao Cao’s
invitation had come so peremptorily. On their return they heard that two
officers had arrived and led away Liu Bei to the Prime Minister. They hastened
to his palace and were told their brother was with his host in the grounds, and
they feared something had happened. So they rushed in.
Now when they saw their brother quietly talking with Cao Cao and enjoying a cup
of wine, they took up their usual places and meekly stood waiting.
“Why did you come?” said Cao Cao.
“We heard that you, Sir, had invited our brother to a wine party, and we came
to amuse you with a little sword play,” said they.
“This is not a Hongmen Banquet,” replied Cao Cao. “What use have we for
Xiang Chang and Xiang Ba of old?”
Liu Bei smiled. The host ordered wine to be served to the two “Fan Kuais”
to allay their anxiety and, soon after, the three took their leave and returned
homeward.
“We were nearly frightened to death,” said Guan Yu.
The story of the dropped chopsticks was told. The two asked what their brother
intended by his actions.
“My learning gardening was to convince Cao Cao of my perfect simplicity and
the absence of any ambition. But when he suddenly pointed to me as one of the
heroes, I was startled, for I thought he had some suspicions. Happily the
thunder at that moment supplied the excuse I wanted.”
“Really you are very clever,” said they.
Next day Cao Cao again invited Liu Bei and while the two were drinking, Man
Chong, who had been dispatched to find out what Yuan Shao was doing, came to
present his report.
Man Chong said, “Gongsun Zan has been completely defeated by Yuan Shao.”
“Do you know the details? I should like to know how,” interrupted Liu Bei.
“They were at war, and Gongsun Zan got the worst of it, so he acted on the
defensive, building a high wall about his army and on that erecting a high
tower, which he called the Yijing Tower. Therein he placed all his grain, one
hundred thousand carts total, and took up his own quarters. His fighting troops
passed in and out without ceasing, some going out to give battle, others
returning to rest. One of them was surrounded and sent to ask Gongsun Zan to
rescue him. Gongsun Zan said, ‘If I rescue him, hereafter everyone will want
to be helped and will not exert himself.’ So Gongsun Zan did not go. This
disgusted his soldiers, and many deserted to the enemy so that his army
diminished. He sent letters to the capital to crave help, but the messenger was
captured. He sent to Zhang Yan to arrange with him for a two-pronged joint
attack, and those letters with the plans also fell into Yuan Shao’s hands.
The plans were adopted by Yuan Shao, who gave the signals agreed upon. Thus
Gongsun Zan fell into an ambush, lost heavily, and retreated into the city.
There he was besieged, and a subterranean passage was pierced into the tower
where he lodged. The tower was set on fire, and Gongsun Zan could not escape.
So he slew his wife and little ones and hanged himself. The flames destroyed
the bodies of the whole family.
“Yuan Shao has added the remnants of the vanquished army to his own and so
become yet stronger. His brother Yuan Shu in the South of River Huai, however,
has become so arrogant and cruel that the people have turned against him. Then
Yuan Shu had sent to say he would yield the title of Emperor, which he had
assumed, in favor of Yuan Shao. Yuan Shao demanded the Imperial Hereditary Seal
also, and Yuan Shu promised to bring it in person. Now Yuan Shu has abandoned
River Huai and is about to move to the North of Yellow River. If he succeeded,
the two brothers will control adjoining regions and be dangerous.”
It was a sad story, and Liu Bei remembered with sorrow that, in the days of
success and prosperity, the dead chieftain, Gongsun Zan, had pushed his
interest and shown him much kindness. Moreover he was anxious to know the fate
of Zhao Zilong.
In his heart he thought, “What better chance am I likely to get of setting
myself free?”
So Liu Bei rose and said to Cao Cao, “If Yuan Shu goes over to join his
brother, he will surely pass through Xuzhou. I beg you to give me an army with
which to smite him on the way. That will finish Yuan Shu.”
“Memorialize the Emperor tomorrow, and I will give you an army,” said Cao
Cao.
So next day Liu Bei went to an audience, and Cao Cao gave him command of fifty
thousand horse and foot, and sent Generals Zhu Ling and Lu Zhao with him.
At parting with Liu Bei, the Emperor shed tears.
As soon as Liu Bei reached his lodging, he set about preparations for immediate
departure, taking his seal as General and preparing his weapons. Dong Cheng
went three miles away from the city to bid him farewell.
“You must not mind my going. This journey will assuredly help on the
scheme,” said Liu Bei.
“Keep your mind fixed on that,” said Dong Cheng, “and never forget what
His Majesty requires of us.”
They parted. Presently his brothers asked him why he was in such a hurry to get
away.
Liu Bei replied, “I have been a bird in a cage, a fish in a net. This is like
the fish regaining the open sea and the bird soaring into the blue sky. I
suffered much from the confinement.”
Then he ordered Zhu Ling and Lu Zhao to march the troops faster.
Now Guo Jia and Cheng Yu had been absent inspecting stores and supplies when
Liu Bei left. As soon as they heard of his expedition, they went in to see
their master, asking him why he had let Liu Bei go in command of an army.
“He is going to cut off Yuan Shu,” replied Cao Cao.
“Formerly, when he was Imperial Protector of Yuzhou, we recommended that he
should be put to death, but you would not hear of it. Now you have given him an
army. You have allowed the dragon to reach the sea, the tiger to return to the
mountains. What control will you have in future?”
So spoke Cheng Yu, and Guo Jia followed in the same strain, saying, “Even if
you would not put him to death, you need not have let him go. As the proverb
says, ‘Relax opposition for one day and age-long harm ensues.’ You must
admit the truth of this.”
Cao Cao recognized that these were prudent counsels, so he sent Xu Chu with
five hundred horsemen and imperative orders to bring Liu Bei back again.
Liu Bei was marching as rapidly as possible when he noticed a cloud of dust in
the rear and remarked to his brothers, “Surely they are pursuing us.”
He halted and made a stockade, and ordered his brothers to be in readiness, one
on each flank. Presently the messenger arrived and found himself in the midst
of an army ready for battle. Xu Chu dismounted and entered the camp to speak
with Liu Bei.
“Sir, on what business have you come?” asked Liu Bei.
“The Prime Minister has sent me to request you to return as he has further
matters to discuss with you.”
“When a general has once taken the field, even the royal command is of no
effect. I bade farewell to the Emperor, I received the Prime Minister’s
commands, and there can be nothing further to talk about. You may return
forthwith and take that as my reply.”
Xu Chu was undecided what action to take. He thought, “The Prime Minister
cherishes a friendship with Liu Bei, and I have no orders to kill. I can only
return with this reply and ask further instructions.”
So Xu Chu left. When he related what had occurred, Cao Cao still hesitated to
take any action.
“This refusal to return means enmity,” said Cheng Yu and Guo Jia.
“Still, two of my people are with him,” said Cao Cao. “He will not dare
do anything unfriendly, I think. Beside, I sent him and I cannot go back on my
own orders.”
So Liu Bei was not pursued.
He took his arms, he fed his steed,
And fared forth willingly,
Intent to accomplish his King’s behest
Deep graven on his memory.
At least he had broken out of his cage,
He heard not the tiger’s roar,
He had shaken the shackles from his feet,
As a dragon on high could soar.
As soon as Ma Teng heard that Liu Bei had set forth, he reported that pressing
business called him and marched back to his own region, Xiliang.
When Liu Bei reached Xuzhou, the Deputy Imperial Protector, Che Zhou, came to
meet him. When the official banquet was over, Sun Qian and Mi Zhu paid their
visit to Che Zhou. Then Liu Bei proceeded to his residence to greet his family.
Scouts were sent out to see what Yuan Shu was doing. They came back with the
intelligence: “Yuan Shu’s arrogance had driven away his generals, Lei Bo
and Chen Lan, who had returned to their mountain fastness in Mount Song. His
forces thus reduced, he wrote resigning the imperial style he had assumed in
favor of his brother Yuan Shao, who at once commanded his presence. Thereupon
he packed up the Palace fittings he had made, got the remnants of his army in
order, and marched west.”
When Yuan Shu neared Xuzhou, Liu Bei led out his force of fifty thousand
soldiers and four generals —-Guan Yu, Zhang Fei, Zhu Ling, and Lu Zhao. Yuan
Shu sent out Ji Ling to force a way through. But Zhang Fei opposed him and
attacked without a parley. In the tenth bout Zhang Fei cut down Ji Ling. The
defeated troops fled in all directions.
Then Yuan Shu came up with his own army. Liu Bei placed Zhu Ling and Lu Zhao in
command of the left wing, Guan Yu and Zhang Fei the right wing, and himself in
the center, and so met Yuan Shu.
As soon as the enemy came near, Liu Bei began to abuse him, crying, “O
rebellious one, and wicked, I have a command to destroy you! Yield, then, with
good grace and so escape your punishment!”
“Base weaver of mats and mean maker of straw sandals! How dare you make light
of me?” replied Yuan Shu, and he gave the signal for an attack.
Liu Bei retired, and his generals from the flanks closed in. They smote the
army of Yuan Shu till corpses littered the plain and blood flowed in streams.
At the same time Yuan Shu’s former generals, Lei Bo and Chen Lan from Mount
Song, attacked the baggage train and completed the destruction. Yuan Shu tried
to retreat to Shouchun, but Lei Bo and Chen Lan barred the road.
Yuan Shu sought refuge in Jiangling, with one thousand troops left of all his
army. And these were the weakly ones, able neither to fight nor flee. It was
then the height of summer, and their food was nearly exhausted. The whole
provision consisted of thirty carts of wheat. This was made over to the
soldiers, and the members of his household went hungry. Many died of actual
starvation. Yuan Shu could not swallow the coarse food that the soldiers lived
on. One day he bade his cook bring him some honeyed water to quench his thirst.
“There is no water, save that tainted with blood,” replied the cook.
“Where can I get honeyed water?”
This was the last straw. Yuan Shu sat up on his couch and rolled out on the
floor with a loud cry. Blood gushed from his mouth and thus he died. It was the
sixth month of the fourth year of Rebuilt Tranquillity (AD 199).
The last days of Han approached and weapons clashed in every quarter,
The misguided Yuan Shu, lost to all sense of honor,
Forgetful of his forefathers, who had filled the state’s highest offices,
Madly aspired to become himself Emperor,
Resting his outrageous claim on the possession of the Seal,
And arrogantly boasting that thus he fulfilled the design of Heaven.
Alas! Sick unto death he vainly begged for a little honeyed water;
He died, alone.
Yuan Shu being dead, his nephew, Yuan Yin, taking his coffin and his wife and
children, sought shelter in Lujiang. There the Magistrate, Xu Liu, slew all the
survivors. Among the possessions Xu Liu found the Imperial Hereditary Seal,
which he at once took to the capital and presented to Cao Cao, for which
service he was made Governor of Gaoling. Since then the Imperial Hereditary
Seal belonged to Cao Cao.
When Liu Bei heard that Yuan Shu was dead, he prepared a report to the Throne,
and sent it to Cao Cao. He sent the two generals deputed by Cao Cao, Zhu Ling
and Lu Zhao, back to the capital, keeping the army to defend Xuzhou. He also
personally went through the countryside commanding the people to resume their
ordinary avocations.
Cao Cao was angry when his two officers returned without their man and was
going to put them to death. Xun Yu reasoned with him.
“The power was in Liu Bei’s hands, and so these two had no alternative,”
said Xun Yu.
So they were pardoned.
“You should instruct Che Zhou, the Deputy Imperial Protector, to try to
destroy him,” said Xun Yu.
Accordingly he sent secret orders to Che Zhou, who took Chen Deng into his
confidence and asked his advice.
Chen Deng said, “That is easy. Liu Bei is outside the city, and an ambush in
the city gate to attack him on his return from the country will be final. I
will attack the escort with arrows from the city walls.”
Che Zhou agreed to try this.
Then Chen Deng went to his father to tell him. Chen Gui bade him go and warn
the intended victim. Chen Deng at once rode away to do so. Before long he met
Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, to whom he told his story.
Now Liu Bei was following some distance behind. As soon as Zhang Fei heard of
the plot, he wanted to attack the ambush, but Guan Yu proposed another plan.
Said he, “Attacking the ambush will be a failure, since we are without the
walls. And I think we can compass the death of Che Zhou. In the night we will
pretend to be some of Cao Cao’s soldiers and entice him out to meet us. We
will slay him.”
Zhang Fei approved of the plan. Now the soldiers still had some of Cao Cao’s
army banners and wore similar armor. About the third watch they came to the
city wall and hailed the gate. Those on guard asked who they were. The men
replied that they were Zhang Liao’s troops sent from the capital. This was
told Che Zhou who sent hastily for Chen Deng to ask his advice.
“If I do not receive them, they will suspect my loyalty,” said Che Zhou.
“Yet if I go out, I may be victim of a ruse.”
So he went up on the wall and said, “It is too dark to distinguish friends
from foes. You must wait till daylight.”
“If Liu Bei know our presence, he will attack,” shouted back the soldiers.
And they begged him to let them in. Still Che Zhou hesitated. They shouted
louder than ever to open the gate.
Presently Che Zhou girded on his armor, placed himself at the head of one
thousand cavalry and went out. He galloped over the bridge, shouting, “Where
is Zhang Liao?”
Then lights blazed around, and he recognized Guan Yu with his sword drawn.
“Wretch!” cried Guan Yu. “You would plot to slay my brother, would
you?”
Che Zhou was too frightened to make good defense, and he turned to reenter the
gate. But as he reached the drawbridge, Chen Deng shot out flights of arrows,
wherefore Che Zhou turned aside and galloped along under the wall. But Guan Yu
came quickly in pursuit. His sword was raised aloft, and as it came down, Che
Zhou fell to the earth.
Guan Yu cut off his head and returned, shouting, “I have slain the traitor.
You others need not fear if you only surrender!”
They threw aside their spears and gave in. As soon as the excitement had
calmed, Guan Yu took the head to show Liu Bei and told him the story of the
plot.
“But what will Cao Cao think of this?” said Liu Bei. “And he may come.”
“If he does, we can meet him,” said Guan Yu.
But Liu Bei was grieved beyond measure. When he entered the city, the elders of
the people knelt in the road to welcome him. When he reached his residence, he
found that Zhang Fei had already exterminated the family of Che Zhou.
Liu Bei said, “We have slain one of Cao Cao’s best officers, and how will
he stand that?”
“Never mind!” cried Chen Deng. “I have a plan.”
Just from grave danger extricated,
A looming war must be placated.
The plan proposed by Chen Deng will be disclosed next.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 22 ****
This was the plan Chen Deng proposed to Liu Bei, “Yuan Shao is Cao Cao’s
terror. He is strongly posted in an extensive territory of four regions —-
Jizhou, Qingzhou, Youzhou, and Bingzhou —-with one million fighting soldiers
and numerous able officers. Write letters and pray him rescue you.”
Liu Bei replied, “But we have never had any dealings with each other, and he
is unlikely to do such a thing for a person who has just destroyed his
brother.”
“There is someone here whose family have been on intimate terms with the
Yuans for a hundred years. Yuan Shao would surely come, if he wrote.”
“And who is this?”
“A man you know well and respect greatly. Can you not guess?”
“You surely mean Zheng Xuan,” said Liu Bei suddenly.
“That is he,” said Chen Deng smiling.
Now Zheng Xuan was a student and a man of great talent, who had long studied
under the famed teacher Ma Rong, whose knowledge of the Book of Odes was
universally recognized. Whenever Ma Rong lectured, he let fall a curtain behind
which were a circle of singing girls. The students were assembled in front of
this curtain. Zheng Xuan attended these lectures for three years and never once
let his eyes wander to the curtain.
Naturally the master admired his pupil. After Zheng Xuan had finished his
studies and gone home, Ma Rong praised him to the others, saying, “Only one
man has penetrated the inner meaning of my instructions, and that one is Zheng
Xuan.”
In Zheng Xuan’s household, the waiting maids were familiar with the Book of
Odes. Once one of the maids opposed Zheng Xuan’s wishes, so as punishment she
was made to kneel in front of the steps. Another girl made fun of her, quoting
from an ode:
“What are you doing there in the mire?”
The kneeling girl capped the verse from another ode, quoted she:
“That was but a simple word I said,
Yet brought it wrath upon my head.”
Such was the family in which Zheng Xuan had been born. In the reign of the
Emperor Huan, he rose to the rank of Chair of the Secretariat. But when the Ten
Eunuchs began to control the government, he gave up office and retired into the
country to Xuzhou. Liu Bei had known him before, had consulted him on many
occasions, and greatly respected him.
Liu Bei was glad that he had remembered this man, and without loss of time, in
company with Chen Deng, he went to Zheng Xuan’s house to ask him to draft
this letter, which Zheng Xuan generously consented to do.
Sun Qian was entrusted with the task of delivery and set out at once. Yuan Shao
read it and considered the matter long before speaking.
“Liu Bei destroyed my brother, and I ought not to help him, but out of
consideration for the writer of this letter I must.”
Thereupon Yuan Shao assembled his officers to consider an attack upon Cao Cao.
Adviser Tian Feng said, “Do not raise an army. The people are worn out, and
the granaries are empty with these constant wars. Let us rather report the
recent victory of Gongsun Zan to the Throne. If that does not reach the
Emperor, then memorialize that Cao Cao is hindering the government. Then raise
an army, occupy Liyang, assemble a Yellow River fleet in Henan, prepare
weapons, send out your various divisions, and within three years you will win
all round.”
Adviser Shen Pei replied, “I do not agree. The military genius of our
illustrious lord having overcome the hordes of the north, to dispose of Cao Cao
is as simple as turning one’s hand. It is not a matter of months.”
Adviser Ju Shou said, “Victory is not always to the many. Cao Cao’s
discipline is excellent; his soldiers are brave and well drilled. He will not
sit down quietly waiting to be surrounded as Gongsun Zan did. Now you abandon
the intention to inform the Throne of our success, which I find a good plan,
but you intend to send out an army without any valid excuse. Our lord should
not do that.”
Then followed adviser Guo Tu, saying, “You are wrong. No expedition against
Cao Cao can lack excuse. But if our master would take the chance now offering
itself of coming into his own, he will accede to the request in the letter of
Zheng Xuan and ally himself with Liu Bei for the destruction of Cao Cao. This
would win the approval of Heaven and the affections of the people, a double
blessing.”
Thus the four advisers differed and wrangled, and Yuan Shao could not decide
which to follow.
Then there came two others, Xu You and Xun Shen, and, seeing them, Yuan Shao
said, “You two have wide experience, how would you decide?”
The two made their obeisance, and Yuan Shao said, “A letter from Zheng Xuan
the Chair has arrived, counseling me to support Liu Bei in an attack on Cao
Cao. Now am I to send an army or not send an army?”
They both cried with one voice, “Send! Your armies are numerous enough and
strong enough. You will destroy a traitor and help the dynasty.”
“Your words just express my desire,” said Yuan Shao and thenceforward the
discussion turned on the expedition.
First, Liu Bei’s legate, Sun Qian, was sent back with Yuan Shao’s consent
and instructions for Liu Bei to make ready to cooperate. Second, Yuan Shao
assigned Shen Pei and Peng Ji as Commanding Generals; Tian Feng, Xun Shen, and
Xu You as Military Advisers; Yan Liang and Wen Chou as Generals. The army was
to be composed of three hundred thousand, horse and foot in equal numbers. They
were to march on Liyang.
When the arrangements were complete, Guo Tu went to his chief, saying, “In
order to manifest the righteousness of your attack on Cao Cao, it would be well
to issue a manifesto with a summary of his various crimes.”
Yuan Shao approved of this, and Chen Lin, well known as a scholar, was
entrusted to compose such a document. Chen Lin had been the Court Secretary in
the reign of the late Emperor Ling. When Dong Zhuo unseated Regent Marshal He
Jin, Chen Lin sought safety in Jizhou. This is the manifesto:
“A perspicacious ruler wisely provides against political vicissitudes; a
loyal minister carefully foresees the difficulties in the assertion of
authority. Wherefore a person of unusual parts precedes an extraordinary
situation, and of such a person the achievements will be extraordinary. For
indeed the ordinary person is quite unequal to an extraordinary situation.
“In former days, after having gained ascendancy over a weakling emperor of
the powerful Qin Dynasty, Prime Minister Zhao Gao wielded the whole authority
of the Throne, overruling the government. All dignity and fortune came through
him, and his contemporaries were restrained so that none dared to speak openly.
Slowly but surely evolved the tragedy of the Wangyi Palace, when the Emperor
was slain and the Imperial Tablets perished in the flames. Zhao Gao, the author
of these crimes, has ever since been held up to obloquy as the arch example of
an evil doer.
“In the later days of Empress Lu of the Hans, after the death of the Supreme
Ancestor, the world saw Lu Chan and Lu Lu, brothers of the Empress and fellows
in wickedness, monopolizing the powers of government. Within the capital, they
commanded two armies, and without they ruled the feudal states of Liang and
Zhao. They arbitrarily controlled all state affairs and decided all questions
in the council chamber and the court. This dominance of the base and declension
of the noble continued till the hearts of the people grew cold within them.
“Thereupon Zhou Bo, Lord of Jiang, and Liu Zhan, Lord of Zhuxu, asserted
their dignity and let loose their wrath. They destroyed the contumacious
ministers and restored their ruler to his royal state. Thus they enabled the
kingly way to be reestablished and the glory to be manifested. Here are two
instances where ministers asserted their authority.
“This Cao Cao, now Minister of Works, forsooth, had for ancestor a certain
eunuch named Cao Teng, fitting companion of Xu Huan and Zuo Guan. All three
were prodigies of wickedness and insatiably avaricious and, let loose on the
world, they hindered ethical progress and preyed upon the populace. This Cao
Teng begged for and adopted Cao Cao’s father who, by wholesale bribery,
wagons of gold and cartloads of jewels presented at the gates of the
influential, contrived to sneak his way into considerable office where he could
subvert authority. Thus Cao Cao is the depraved bantling of a monstrous
excrescence, devoid of all virtue in himself, ferocious and cunning, delighting
in disorder and reveling in public calamity.
“Now I, Yuan Shao, a man of war, have mustered my armies and displayed my
might that I may sweep away and destroy the evil opponents of government. I
have already had to deal with Dong Zhuo, the ruffian who invaded the official
circle and wrested the government. At that time I grasped my sword and beat the
drums to restore order in the east. I assembled warriors, selected the best,
and took them into my service. In this matter I came into relations with this
Cao Cao and conferred with him to further my scheme. I gave him command of a
subordinate force and looked to him to render such petty service as he was
equal to. I suffered his stupidities and condoned his shortcomings, his rash
attacks and facile retreats, his losses and shameful defeats, his repeated
destruction of whole armies. Again and again I sent him more troops and filled
the gaps in his depleted ranks. I even addressed a memorial to the Throne for
him to be appointed Imperial Protector of Yanzhou. I made him feel as he were a
tiger. I added to his honors and increased his authority, hoping that
eventually he would justify himself by a victory against Dong Zhuo such as Qin
used Meng Ming against Jin.
“But Cao Cao availed himself of the opportunity to overstep all bounds, to
give free rein to violence and evil. He stripped the common people, outraged
the good, and injured the virtuous. Bian Rang, Governor of Jiujiang, was a man
of conspicuous talent and of world-wide reputation. He was honest in speech and
correct in demeanor. He spoke without flattery. Cao Cao put him to death and
his head was exposed, and his family utterly destroyed. From that day to this
scholars have deeply mourned, and popular resentment has steadily grown. One
person raised his arm in anger, and the whole countryside followed him.
Whereupon Cao Cao was smitten at Xuzhou, and his territory was snatched by Lu
Bu. He fled eastward without shelter or refuge.
“My policy is a strong trunk and weak branches, a commanding central
government and obedient feudal lords. Also I am no partisan. Therefore I again
raised my banners, donned my armor, and moved forward to attack. My drums
rolled for an assault on Lu Bu, and his multitudes incontinently fled. I saved
Cao Cao from destruction and restored him to a position of authority. Wherein I
must confess to showing no kindness to the people of Yanzhou, although it was a
great matter for Cao Cao.
“Later it happened that the imperial cortege moved east, and a horde of
rebels of Dong Zhuo’s faction rose and attacked. The course of government was
hindered. At that moment my territory was threatened from the north, and I
could not leave it. Wherefore I sent one of my officers, Xu Xun, to Cao Cao to
see to the repair of the dynastic temples and the protection of the youthful
sovereign. Thereupon Cao Cao gave the rein to his inclinations. He arbitrarily
ordered the removal of the court to Xuchang. He brought shame upon the Ruling
House and subverted the laws. He engrossed the chairmanship of the three
highest offices and monopolized the control of the administration. Offices and
rewards were conferred according to his will; punishment was at his word. He
glorified whole families of those he loved; he exterminated whole clans of
those he hated. Open critics were executed; secret opponents were assassinated.
Officials locked their lips; wayfarers only exchanged glances. Chairs of boards
recorded levies, and every government official held a sinecure.
“The late Yang Biao, a man who had filled two of the highest offices of state
as Chairs of two boards, because of some petty grudge was, though guiltless,
charged with a crime. He was beaten and suffered every form of cruelty. This
arbitrary and impulsive act was a flagrant disregard of constitutional rules.
“Another victim was the Counselor Zhao Yan. He was faithful in remonstrance,
honest in speech, endowed with the highest principles of rectitude. He was
listened to at court. His words carried enough weight with the Emperor to cause
him to modify his intention and confer reward for outspokenness. Desirous of
diverting all power into his own hands and stifle all criticism, Cao Cao
presumed to arrest and put to death this censor, in defiance of all legal
procedures.
“Another evil deed was the destruction of the tomb of Prince Xiao of Liang,
the brother of the late Emperor. His tomb should certainly have been respected,
even its mulberries and sweetgum trees, its cypresses and its pines. Cao Cao
led soldiers to the cemetery and stood by while it was desecrated, the coffin
destroyed and the poor corpse exposed. They stole the gold and jewels of the
dead. This deed brought tears to the eyes of the Emperor and rent the hearts of
all people. Cao Cao also appointed new offices —-Commander Who Opens Grave
Mounds and General Who Seeks for Gold —-whose tracks were marked by
desecrated graves and exhumed bodies. Indeed, while assuming the position of
the highest officer of state, he indulged the inclination of a bandit,
polluting the empire, oppressing the people, a bane to gods and humans.
“He added to this by setting up minute and vexatious prohibitions so that
there were nets and snares spread in every pathway, traps and pitfalls laid in
every road. A hand raised was caught in a net, a foot advanced was taken in an
entanglement. Wherefore the people of his regions, Yanzhou and Yuzhou, waxed
desperate and the inhabitants of the metropolis groaned and murmured in anger.
“Read down the names through all the years,
Of ministers that all people curse,
For greed and cruelty and lust,
Than Cao Cao you will not find a worse.
“I have investigated the cases of evil deeds in the regions, but I have been
unable to reform him. I have given him repeated opportunities hoping that he
would repent. But he has the heart of a wolf, the nature of a wild beast. He
nourishes evil in his bosom and desires to pull down the pillars of the state,
to weaken the House of Han, to destroy the loyal and true, and to stand himself
conspicuous as the chiefest of criminals.
“Formerly, when I attacked the north, Gongsun Zan, that obstinate bandit and
perverse brave, resisted my might for a year. Before Gongsun Zan could be
destroyed, this Cao Cao wrote to him that, under the pretense of assisting my
loyal armies, he would covertly lead them to destruction. The plot was
discovered through his messengers, and Gongsun Zan also perished. This blunted
Cao Cao’s ardor, and his plans failed.
“Now he is camped at the Ao Granaries, with the Yellow River to strengthen
his position. Like the mantis in the story, who threatened the chariot with its
forelegs, he thinks himself terrible. But with the dignity and prestige of Han
to support me, I confront the whole world. I have spearmen by millions,
horsemen by hundreds of thousands, fierce and vigorous warriors strong as Chong
Huang and Wu Huo, those heroes of antiquity. I have enlisted expert archers and
strong bowmen. In Bingzhou my armies have crossed the Taihang Range, and in
Qingzhou they have forded River Ji and River Ta. They have coasted down the
Yellow River to attack his van, and from Jingzhou the armies of Liu Biao have
descended to Wancheng and Wangye to smite his rearguard. Thunder-like in the
weight of their march, tiger-like in the alertness of their advance, they are
as flames let loose among light grass, as the blue ocean poured on glowing
embers. Is there any hope that he escape destruction?
“Of the hordes of Cao Cao, those who can fight are from the north or from
other camps, and they all desire to return home. They weep whenever they look
to the north. The others belong to Yanzhou or Yuzhou, being remnants of the
armies of Lu Bu and Zhang Yang. Beaten, stern necessity forced them to accept
service, but they take it only as a temporary expedient. They who have been
wounded hate each other. If I give the signal to return and send my drums to
the mountain tops, and wave the white flag to show them they may surrender,
they will melt away like dew before the sun, and no blood will be shed. The
victory will be mine.
“Now the Hans are failing and the bonds of empire are relaxed. The sacred
dynasty has no supporter, the ministers are not strong enough to cope with the
difficulties. Within the capital the responsible ministers are crestfallen and
helpless. There is no one to rely upon. Such loyal and high principled people
as are left are browbeaten by a tyrannical minister. How can they manifest
their virtue?
“Cao Cao has surrounded the Palace with seven hundred veterans, the
ostensible object being to guard the Emperor, but the covert design being to
hold him prisoner. I fear this is but the first step in usurpation, and so I
take my part. Now is the time for loyal ministers to sacrifice their lives, the
opportunity for officers to perform meritorious deeds. Can I fail to urge you?
“Cao Cao has forged commands to himself to undertake the control of
government affairs and, in the name of the state, sends out calls for military
assistance. I fear lest distant regions may obey his behest and send troops to
help him, to the detriment of the multitude and their everlasting shame. No
wise person will do so.
“The forces of four regions —-Bingzhou, Jizhou, Qingzhou, and Youzhou —-
are moving out simultaneously. When this call reaches Jingzhou, you will see
their forces cooperate with those of Liu Biao. All regions and counties ought
to organize volunteers and set them along their borders to demonstrate their
force and prove their loyal support of the dynasty. Will not this be rendering
extraordinary service?
“The rank of lordship, with feudal rights over five thousand households and a
money reward of five millions, will be the reward of the one who brings the
head of Cao Cao. No questions will be asked of those who surrender. I publish
abroad this notice of my bounty and the rewards offered that you may realize
that the dynasty is in real danger.”
Yuan Shao read this effusion with great joy. He at once ordered copies to be
posted everywhere, in towns and cities, at gates, tax stations, ferries, and
passes. Copies found their way to the capital, and one got into Cao Cao’s
palace. That day he happened to be in bed with a bad headache. The servants
took the paper to the sick man’s room. He read it and was frightened from the
tips of his hair to the marrow of his very bones. He broke out into a cold
perspiration, and his headache vanished.
Cao Cao bounded out of bed and said to Cao Hong, “Who wrote this?”
“They say it is Chen Lin’s brush,” replied he.
Cao Cao laughed, “They have the literary gift; they would rather have the
military too to back it up. This fellow may be a very elegant writer, but what
if Yuan Shao’s fighting capacity falls short?”
Cao Cao called his advisers together to consider the next move.
Kong Rong heard of the summons and went to Cao Cao, saying, “You should not
fight with Yuan Shao: He is too strong. Make peace.”
Xun Yu said, “He is despicable. Do not make peace.”
Kong Rong replied, “His land is wide and his people strong. He has many
skillful strategists like Guo Tu, Xu You, Peng Ji, and Shen Pei; loyal leaders
like Tian Feng and Ju Shou; and formidable generals like Yan Liang and Wen
Chou; able commanders like Gao Lan, Zhang He, Han Meng, and Chunyu Qiong. You
cannot say he is despicable.”
Xun Yu laughed, saying, “His army is a rabble. One general, Tian Feng, is
bold but treacherous; another, Xu You, is greedy and ignorant; Shen Pei is
devoted but stupid; Peng Ji is steady but useless. And these four of such
different temperaments, mutually incompatible, will make for confusion rather
than efficiency. The brave Yan Liang and Wen Chou are worthless and can be
disposed of in the first battle; and the others such as Gao Lan, Zhang He, Han
Meng, and Chunyu Qiong are poor, rough stuff. What is the use even of their
hundred thousands?”
Kong Rong was silent, and Cao Cao smiled.
“They are even as Xun Yu describes,” said Cao Cao.
Then Cao Cao issued orders. Generals Liu Dai and Wang Zhong were to lead an
army of fifty thousand troops, displaying the Prime Minister’s banners, and
march against Xuzhou to attack Liu Bei.
This Liu Dai had been Imperial Protector of Yanzhou but had surrendered to Cao
Cao and entered Cao Cao’s service after the fall of his region. Cao Cao had
given him a rank as Supernumerary Leader and now was disposed to make use of
him.
Cao Cao himself took command of a large army of two hundred thousand troops for
a simultaneous attack on Yuan Shao at Liyang.
Adviser Cheng Yu said, “The two Liu Dai and Wang Zhong sent against Liu Bei
are unequal to their task.”
“I know,” said Cao Cao. “They are not meant to fight Liu Bei. It is
merely a feint. They have orders not to make any real attack till I have
overcome Yuan Shao. Then Liu Bei will be next.”
Liu Dai and Wang Zhong went their way, and Cao Cao marched out his grand army,
which came into touch with the enemy, then thirty miles distant, at Liyang.
Both sides made fortified camps and waited watching each other. This went on
for two months of the autumn.
There was dissension in Yuan Shao’s camp. Xu You was at enmity with his
colleague, Shen Pei, who was in commanding position; and the strategist Ju Shou
resented the rejection of his plan. So they would not attack. Yuan Shao also
could not make up his mind.
Tired of this state of inaction, Cao Cao then gave orders to his commanders:
Zang Ba was to continue the pressure on Qingzhou and Xuzhou; Yu Jin and Li Dian
to deploy troops along the Yellow River; Cao Ren to quarter the main force at
Guandu. Then Cao Cao with an army marched back to Capital Xuchang.
The five legions sent against Liu Bei went into camp thirty-five miles from
Xuzhou. The camp made an imposing display of the banners of the Prime Minister,
but no attacks followed. Their spies were very busy north of the river to get
news of Cao Cao’s movement. On the defensive side, Liu Bei, as he was
uncertain of the strength of the force against him, dared not move.
Suddenly orders came for the Cao Cao’s army to attack, and then discord
showed itself.
Liu Dai said, “The Prime Minister orders an attack: You advance.”
Wang Zhong replied, “You were named first.”
“I am the Commander-in-Chief. It is not my place to go first.”
“I will go with you in joint command,” said Wang Zhong.
“Let us cast lots, and he upon whom the lot falls must go,” said Liu Dai.
They drew lots, and it fell to Wang Zhong, who advanced toward Xuzhou with half
the force.
When Liu Bei heard of the threatened attack, he called Chen Deng to consult.
Liu Bei said, “There is dissension in Yuan Shao’s camp at Liyang, so they
do not advance. We do not know where Cao Cao is, but his own banner is not
displayed in his Liyang’s camp. Why then is it shown here?”
Chen Deng replied, “His tricks take a hundred forms. It must be that he
regards the north as more important and has gone there to look after its
defense. He dares not show his flag there, and I feel sure it is only meant to
mislead us. He is not here.”
Liu Bei then asked whether one of his brothers would find out the truth, and
Zhang Fei volunteered to go.
“I fear you are unsuited for this,” said Liu Bei. “You are too
impetuous.”
“If Cao Cao is there, I will haul him over here,” said Zhang Fei.
“Let me go first and find out,” said Guan Yu.
“If you go, I shall feel more at ease,” said Liu Bei.
So Guan Yu set out with three thousand soldiers to reconnoiter. It was then
early winter, and snow was falling from a gloomy sky. They marched regardless
of the snow and came near Wang Zhong’s camp with arms all ready to attack.
Guan Yu summoned Wang Zhong to a parley.
“The Prime Minister is here. Why do you not surrender?” said Wang Zhong.
“Beg him to come to the front, for I would speak with him,” replied Guan
Yu.
“Is he likely to come out to see such as you,” said Wang Zhong.
Guan Yu angrily dashed forward, and Wang Zhong set his spear to meet him. Guan
Yu rode till he came close to his antagonist, then suddenly wheeled away. Wang
Zhong went after him and followed up a slope. Just as they passed the crest,
Guan Yu suddenly wheeled again, shouted, and came on flourishing the mighty
sword. Wang Zhong could not withstand that and fled. But Guan Yu, changing the
huge sword to his left hand, with his right laid hold of his victim by the
straps of his breastplate, lifted him out of the saddle, and rode away to his
own lines with the captive laid across the pommel of his saddle. Wang Zhong’s
army scattered.
The captive was sent to Xuzhou, where he was summoned into the presence of Liu
Bei.
“Who are you? What office do you hold? How dare you falsely display the
ensigns of the Prime Minister?” said Liu Bei.
“What do you mean by falsely when I simply obeyed my orders?” said Wang
Zhong. “My master wanted to produce the impression that he was present.
Really he was not there.”
Liu Bei treated him kindly, giving him food and clothing, but put him in prison
till his colleague could be captured.
Guan Yu said to Liu Bei, “I knew you had peaceful intentions in your mind;
therefore, I captured Wang Zhong instead of slaying him.”
“I was afraid of Zhang Fei’s hasty and impulsive temper,” said Liu Bei.
“He would have slain this man. So I could not send him. There is no advantage
in killing people of this sort, and while alive they are often useful in
amicable settlements.”
Here Zhang Fei said, “You have got this Wang Zhong; now I will go and get the
other man.”
“Be careful,” said Liu Bei. “Liu Dai was once Imperial Protector of
Yanzhou, and he was one of the nobles who met at Tiger Trap Pass to destroy
Dong Zhuo. He is not to be despised.”
“I do not think him worth talking about so much. I will bring him in alive
just as Second Brother did this other.”
“I fear that if his life be lost, it may upset our designs,” said Liu Bei.
“If I kill him, I will forfeit my own life,” said Zhang Fei.
So he was given three thousand soldiers and went off quickly.
The capture of his colleague made Liu Dai careful. He strengthened his defenses
and kept behind them. He took no notice of the daily challenges and continual
insults which began with Zhang Fei’s arrival.
After some days Zhang Fei evolved a ruse. He issued orders to prepare to rush
the enemy’s camp at night, but he himself spent the day drinking. Pretending
to be very intoxicated, he held a court-martial, and one soldier was severely
flogged for a breach of discipline.
The man was left bound in the midst of the camp, Zhang Fei saying, “Wait till
I am ready to start tonight: You shall be sacrificed to the flag.”
At the same time he gave secret orders to the custodians to let the man escape.
The man found his opportunity, crept out of camp, and went over to the enemy,
to whom he betrayed the plan of a night attack. As the man bore signs of savage
punishment, Liu Dai was the more disposed to credit his desertion and tale. So
Liu Dai made his arrangements, putting the greater part of his troops in ambush
outside his camp so that it was empty.
That night, having divided his army into three parties, Zhang Fei went to
attack the camp. A few men were ordered to advance directly, dash in and set
fire going. Two larger bodies of troops were to go round to the rear of the
camp and attack when they saw the fire well started. At the third watch, Zhang
Fei, with his veterans, went to cut off Liu Dai’s road to the rear.
The thirty men told off to start a conflagration made their way into the camp
and were successful. When the flames arose, the ambushing troops rushed out but
only to find themselves attacked on both sides. This confused them, and as they
knew nothing of the number of their assailants, they were panic stricken and
scattered.
Liu Dai, with a company of footmen got clear of the fight and fled, but he went
straight toward Zhang Fei. Escape was impossible, and the two men rode up each
to attack the other. Zhang Fei captured his opponent, and the men surrendered.
Zhang Fei sent news of this success to his brothers.
Liu Bei said, “Hitherto Zhang Fei has been rather violent, but this time he
has acted wisely, and I am very pleased.”
They rode out to welcome Zhang Fei.
“You said I was too rough. How now?” said Zhang Fei to his brothers.
“If I had not put you on your mettle, you would not have evolved this
stratagem,” said Liu Bei.
Zhang Fei laughed. Then appeared the captive Liu Dai, in bonds.
Liu Bei at once dismounted and loosed the cords, saying, “My young brother
was rather hasty, but you must pardon him.”
So Liu Dai was freed. He was taken into the city, his colleague was released,
and both were cared for.
Liu Bei said to them, “I could not help putting Deputy Imperial Protector Che
Zhou to death when he tried to kill me, but Cao Cao took it as disaffection and
sent you two generals to punish me. I have received much kindness from him and
certainly would not show ingratitude by killing you. I wish you to speak for me
and explain when you get back.”
“We are deeply grateful that you spare our lives, and we will certainly do so
in gratitude for what our wives and children owe you.”
Next day the two leaders and their army were allowed to depart unscathed. But
before they had got three miles from the boundary, they heard a mighty shouting
and there appeared Zhang Fei barring the road.
“My brother made a mistake in letting you go. He did not understand. How
could he give freedom to two rebels?”
This made the two men quake with fear, but as the fierce eyed warrior with
uplifted sword was bearing down upon them, they heard another man galloping up
and shouting, “Do not behave so disgracefully!”
The newcomer was Guan Yu, and his appearance relieved the unhappy men of all
fear.
“Why do you stop them since our brother set them free?” cried Guan Yu.
“If they are let go today, they will surely come back,” cried Zhang Fei.
“Wait till they do, then you may kill them,” replied Guan Yu.
The two leaders with one voice cried, “Even if the Prime Minister slay our
whole clans, we will never come again. We pray you pardon us.”
Said Zhang Fei, “If Cao Cao himself had come, I would have slain him. Not a
breastplate should have gone back. But for this time I leave you your heads.”
Clapping their hands to their heads the two men scuttled off while the two
brothers returned to the city.
“Cao Cao will certainly come,” said Guan Yu and Zhang Fei.
Sun Qian said, “This is not a city that can hold out for long. We should send
part of our forces to Xiaopei and guard Xiapi as a corner stone of our
position.”
Liu Bei agreed and told off Guan Yu to guard Xiapi whither he also sent his two
wives, Lady Gan and Lady Mi. The former was a native of Xiapi; the latter was
Mi Zhu’s younger sister.
Sun Qian, Jian Yong, Mi Zhu, and Mi Fang were left to defend Xuzhou, and Liu
Bei with Zhang Fei went to Xiaopei.
The two released leaders, Liu Dai and Wang Zhong, hastened home to Cao Cao and
explained to him that Liu Bei was not disaffected.
But their master was exceeding angry with them, crying, “You shameful
traitors, what use are you?”
He roared to the guards to take them away to instant execution.
How can a hare or a deer expect
To conquer in tiger strife?
Minnows and shrimps that with dragons contend
Already have done with life.
The fate of the two leaders will be told in the next chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 23 ****
At the close of the last chapter the two unsuccessful leaders, Liu Dai and Wang
Zhong, were in danger of death.
However, Kong Rong remonstrated with Cao Cao, saying, “You knew these two
were no match for Liu Bei, and if you put them to death because they failed,
you will lose the hearts of your people.”
Wherefore the death sentence was not executed, but they were deprived of rank
and status.
Cao Cao next proposed to lead an army himself to attack Liu Bei, but Kong Rong
advised, “The weather is too inclement. We must wait the return of spring. In
the interval, we better use the time to arrange peace with Zhang Xiu and Liu
Biao, before launching an expedition against Xuzhou.”
Wherefore Liu Ye was sent to Zhang Xiu and in due time reached Xiangyang. He
first had an interview with Jia Xu, Zhang Xiu’s adviser, whereat he dwelt
upon Cao Cao’s virtues so that Jia Xu was impressed. Jia Xu kept Liu Ye as a
guest and undertook to smooth his way.
Soon after Liu Ye saw Zhang Xiu and spoke of the advantages of coming to terms
with Cao Cao. While the discussion was in progress, a messenger from Yuan Shao
was announced, and he was called in. He presented letters and, when they also
proposed terms of peace, Jia Xu asked what their success had been lately
against Cao Cao.
“The war had ceased for the moment on account of the winter,” replied the
messenger. “As you, General, and Liu Biao are both well reputed officers of
the state, I have been sent to request your help.”
Jia Xu laughed, “You can return to your master and say that as he could not
brook rivalry of his brother, he certainly would be sorely put to it with that
of all the officers of the state.”
The letter was torn into fragments before the messenger’s face, and he was
angrily bidden be gone.
“But his master, Yuan Shao, is stronger than Cao Cao,” protested Zhang Xiu.
“You have torn up his letter and are dismissing his man. What shall we say
about such an insult should Yuan Shao come?”
“Better join hands with Cao Cao,” said Jia Xu.
“But there is still between us an unavenged enmity. We could not suffer each
other.”
Jia Xu said, “There are three advantages in joining hands with Cao Cao.
First, he has a command from the Emperor to restore peace. Second, as Yuan Shao
is so strong, our little help to him will be despised, while we shall loom
large and be well treated by Cao Cao. Third, Cao Cao is going to be Chief of
the Feudal Lords, and he will ignore all private feuds in order to show his
magnanimity to all the world. I hope, General, you will see these things
clearly and hesitate no longer.”
Zhang Xiu, now convinced, became more reasonable and recalled Liu Ye, who, at
the interview, extolled the many virtues of his master.
“If the Prime Minister had any thought of the old quarrel, he would hardly
have sent me to make friendly engagements, would he?” said Liu Ye at the
last.
So Zhang Xiu and his adviser proceeded to the capital where formal submission
was made. At the interview Zhang Xiu bowed low at the steps, but Cao Cao,
hastening forward, took him by the hand and raised him, saying, “Forget that
little fault of mine, I pray you, General!”
Zhang Xiu received the title of General Who Possesses Prowess, and Jia Xu was
appointed Counselor.
Cao Cao then directed his secretaries to draft letters inviting the support of
Liu Biao.
Jia Xu said, “Liu Biao loves to have to do with famous people. If some famous
scholar should be sent to him, he would submit forthwith.”
So Cao Cao inquired of Xun You who was the best person to go as a messenger,
and he recommended Kong Rong. Cao Cao agreed and sent Xun You to speak with
this officer.
Xun You went to Kong Rong, saying, “A scholar of reputation is required to
aid as a messenger of state. Can you undertake this task?”
Kong Rong replied, “I have a certain friend, Mi Heng, whose talents are ten
times mine. He ought to be constantly at the court of the Emperor and not
merely be sent as a state messenger. I will recommend him to the Emperor.”
So Kong Rong wrote the following memorial:
“In ancient days, when the great waters were abroad, the emperor pondered
over their regulation and he sought out people of talent from all directions.
In old time, when Emperor Wu of the Hans desired to enlarge his borders, crowds
of scholars responded to his call.
“Intelligent and holy, Your Majesty ascended the throne. You have fallen upon
evil days, but have been diligent, modest, and untiring in your efforts. Now
the great mountains have sent forth spirits, and people of genius appear.
“I, your humble servant, know of a certain simple scholar, Mi Heng by name,
of Pingyuan, a young man of twenty-four. His moral character is excellent, his
talents eminent. As a youth he took a high place in study and penetrated the
most secret arcane of learning. What he glanced at he could repeat, what he
heard once he never forgot. He is naturally high principled, and his thoughts
are divine. Sang Hongyang’s mental calculations and Zhang Anshi’s memorial
feats compared with Mi Heng’s powers are no longer wonderful. Loyal, sincere,
correct, and straight-forward, his ambition is unsullied. He regards the good
with trembling respect; he detests the evil with uncompromising hatred. Ren Zuo
in unflinching candor, Shi Yu in severe rectitude, never surpassed him.
“Hundreds of hawks are not worth one osprey. If Mi Heng be given a court
appointment, notable results must follow. Ready in debate, rapid in utterance,
his overwhelming intelligence wells up in profusion. In the solution of doubts
and the unraveling of difficulties he has no peer.
“In former days of Han, Jia Yi begged to be sent on trial to a vassal state
for the control of the Xiongnu tribespeople; Zhong Jun offered to bring back
the Prince of Nanyue to do homage to the emperor. The generous conduct of these
youths has been much admired.
“In our day Lu Cui and Yan Xiang, remarkable for their talents, have been
appointed among the secretaries. And Mi Heng is no less capable. Should he be
got, then all possibilities may be realized: The dragon may curvet through the
celestial streets and soar along the Milky Way; fame will extend to the poles
of the universe and hang in the firmament with rainbow glory. He would be the
glory of all the present Ministers and enhance the majesty of the Palace
itself. The Music will acquire new beauties, and the Palace will contain an
excellent treasure. People like Mi Heng are but few. As in the recitation of
‘Ji Chu Songs’ and the singing of ‘Yang E Poems’, the most skillful
performers are sought; and such fleet horses as ‘Fei Tu Broncos’ and ‘Yao
Niao Mustangs’ were looked for by the famous judges of horses, Wang Liang and
Bo Le.
“So I, the humble one, dare not conceal this man. Your Majesty is careful in
the selection of servants and should try him. Let him be summoned as he is,
simply clad in his serge dress; and should he not appear worthy, then may I be
punished for the fault of deception.”
The Emperor read the memorial and passed it to his Prime Minister, who duly
summoned Mi Heng. He came, but after his formal salutations were over, he was
left standing and not invited to sit down.
Looking up to heaven, Mi Heng sighed deeply, saying, “Wide as is the
universe, it cannot produce the person.”
“Under my orders are scores of people whom the world call heroes. What do you
mean by saying there is not the person,” said Cao Cao.
“I should be glad to hear who they are,” said Mi Heng.
“Xun Yu, Xun You, Guo Jia, and Cheng Yu are all people of profound skill and
long views, superior to Xiao He and Chen Ping. Zhang Liao, Xu Chu, Li Dian, and
Yue Jing are bravest of the brave, better than Cen Peng and Ma Wu. Lu Qian and
Man Chong are my secretaries; Yu Jin and Xu Huang are my van leaders; Xiahou
Dun is one of the world’s marvels, Cao Ren is the most successful leader of
the age. Now say you there are not the people?”
“Sir, you are quite mistaken,” said Mi Heng with a smile. “I know all
these things you call people. Xun Yu is qualified to pose at a funeral or ask
after a sick man; Xun You is fit to be a tomb guardian; Cheng Yu might be sent
to shut doors and bolt windows; and Guo Jia is a reciter of poems; Zhang Liao
might beat drums and clang gongs; Xu Chu might lead cattle to pasture; Yue Jing
would make a fair reader of elegy; Li Dian could carry dispatches and notices;
Lu Qian would be a fair armorer; Man Chong could be sent to drink wine and eat
brewers’ grains; Yu Jin might be of use to carry planks and build walls; Xu
Huang might be employed to kill pigs and slay dogs; Xiahou Dun should be styled
‘Whole Body General,’ and Cao Ren should be called ‘Money-grubbing
Governor.’ As for the remainder, they are mere clothes shelves, rice sacks,
wine vases, flesh bags.”
“And what special gifts have you?” said Cao Cao angrily.
“I know everything in heaven above and the earth beneath. I am conversant
with the Three Religions and the Nine Systems of Philosophy. I could make my
prince the rival of Kings Yao and Shun, and I myself could compare in virtue
with Confucius and Mencius. Can I discuss on even terms with common people?”
Now Zhang Liao was present, and he raised his sword to strike down the impudent
visitor who spoke thus to his master, but Cao Cao said, “I want another
drummer boy to play on occasions of congratulation in the court. I will confer
this office upon him.”
Instead of indignantly declining this, Mi Heng accepted the position and went
out.
“He spoke very impertinently,” said Zhang Liao. “Why did you not put him
to death?”
“He has something of a reputation; empty, but people have heard of him and
so, if I put him to death, they would say I was intolerant. As he thinks he has
ability, I have made him a drummer to mortify him.”
Soon after Cao Cao instituted a banquet in the capital at which the guests were
many. The drums were to be played, and the old drummers were ordered to wear
new clothes. But the new drummer Mi Heng took his place with the other
musicians clad in old and worn garments. The piece chosen was the “Tolling of
Yuyang,” and from the earliest taps on the drum the effect was exquisite,
profound as the notes from metal and stone. The performance stirred deeply the
emotions of every guest; some even shed tears.
Seeing all eyes turned on the shabby performer, the attendants said, “Why did
you not put on your new uniform?”
Mi Heng turned to them, slipped off his frayed and torn robe and stood there in
full view, naked as he was born. The assembled guests covered their faces. Then
the drummer composedly drew on his nether garments.
“Why do you behave so rudely at court?” said Cao Cao.
“To flout one’s prince and insult one’s superiors is the real
rudeness,” cried Mi Heng. “I bare my natural body as an emblem of my
purity.”
“So you are pure! And who is foul?”
“You do not distinguish between the wise and the foolish, which is to have
foul vision. You have never read the Odes or the Histories, which is to have
foul speech. You are deaf to honest words, which is to have foul ears. You are
unable to reconcile antiquity with today, which is to be foul without. You
cannot tolerate the vassals, which is to be foul within. You harbor thoughts of
rebellion, which is to have a foul heart. I am one of the most famous scholars
in the empire, and you make me a drummer boy, that is as Yang Huo belittling
Confucius or Zang Cang vilifying Mencius. You desire to be chief and arbitrator
of the great nobles, yet you treat me thus!”
Now Kong Rong who had recommended Mi Heng for employment was among the guests,
and he feared for the life of his friend. Wherefore he tried to calm the storm.
“Mi Heng is only guilty of a misdemeanor,” said Kong Rong. “He is not a
man likely to disturb your dreams like Fu Yue, Illustrious Sir.”
Pointing to Mi Heng, the Prime Minister said, “I will send you to Jingzhou as
my messenger; and if Liu Biao surrenders to me, I will give you a post at
court.”
But Mi Heng was unwilling to go. So Cao Cao bade two of his men prepare three
horses, and they set Mi Heng on the middle one and dragged him along the road
between them.
It is also related that a great number of officers of all ranks assembled at
the East Gate to see the messenger start.
Xun Yu said, “When Mi Heng comes, we will not rise to salute him.”
So when Mi Heng came, dismounted, and entered the waiting room, they all sat
stiff and silent. Mi Heng uttered a loud cry.
“What is that for?” said Xun Yu.
“Should not one cry out when one enters a coffin?” said Mi Heng.
“We may be corpses,” shouted they altogether, “but you are a wandering
headless ghost.”
“I am a minister of Han and not a partisan of Cao Cao’s,” cried Mi Heng.
“You cannot say I have no head.”
They were angry enough to kill him, but Xun Yu checked them, saying, “He is a
paltry fellow. It is not worth soiling your blades with his blood.”
“I am paltry, and yet I have the soul of a man, and you are mere worms,”
said Mi Heng.
They went their ways, all very angry. Mi Heng went on his journey and presently
reached Jingzhou, where he saw Liu Biao. After that, under pretense of
extolling Liu Biao’s virtue, he lampooned Liu Biao who was annoyed and sent
him to Jiangxia to see Huang Zu.
“Why did you not put the fellow to death for lampooning you?” said one to
Liu Biao.
“You see he shamed Cao Cao, but Cao Cao did not kill him as Cao Cao feared to
lose popular favor. So Cao Cao sent him to me, thinking to borrow my hand to
slay him and so suffer the loss of my good name. I have sent him on to Huang Zu
to let Cao Cao see that I understood.”
Liu Biao’s clever caution met with general praise. At that time a messenger
from Yuan Shao was also there with certain proposals for an alliance, and it
was necessary to decide which aide to espouse. All the advisers came together
to consider the question.
Then Commander Han Song said, “As you have now two offers, you can please
yourself and choose your own way to destroy your enemies; for if one refuses,
you can follow the other. Now Cao Cao is an able general and has many capable
officers in his train. It looks as though he may destroy Yuan Shao and then
move his armies across the river. I fear, my lord, you would be unable then to
withstand him. That being so, it would be wise to support Cao Cao, who will
treat you with respect.”
Liu Biao replied, “You go to the capital and see how things tend. That will
help me to decide.”
Han Song said, “The positions of master and servant are clearly defined. Now
I am your man prepared to go all lengths for you and obey you to the last,
whether in serving the Emperor or in following Cao Cao. But lest there should
be any doubt you must remember that if the Emperor gives me any office, then I
shall become his servant and shall not be ready to face death for you.”
“You go and find out what you can. I have ideas in my mind.”
So Han Song took his leave and went to the capital, where he saw Cao Cao. Cao
Cao gave him rank and made him Governor of Lingling.
Adviser Xun Yu remonstrated, saying, “This man came to spy out how things
were moving. He has done nothing to deserve reward, and yet you give him an
office like this. There were no such suspicious rumors connected with poor Mi
Heng, and yet you sent him off and would never test his power.”
“Mi Heng shamed me too deeply before all the world. I am going to borrow Liu
Biao’s hand to remove him. And you need say no more,” said Cao Cao.
Then Cao Cao sent Han Song back to his former master to tell him what had
happened. Han Song came and was full of praise for the virtues of the court and
was keen on persuading Liu Biao to espouse that side.
Then Liu Biao suddenly turned angry, charged him with treachery, put him in
prison, and threatened him with death.
“You turn your back on me,” cried Han Song. “I did not betray you.”
Kuai Liang remarked, “Han Song had foretold this possibility before he left.
It is only what he expected.”
Liu Biao, who was just and reasonable, went no further.
Presently came the news that Mi Heng had been put to death by Huang Zu on
account of a quarrel begun over the wine cups. Both being worse for liquor they
had begun to discuss the worth of people.
“You were in Xuchang,” said Huang Zu. “Who was there of worth?”
“The big boy was Kong Rong and the little one Yang Xiu. There was no one else
to count.”
“What am I like?” said Huang Zu.
“You are like a god in a temple: You sit still and receive sacrifice, but the
lack of intelligence is pitiful.”
“Do you regard me as a mere image?” cried Huang Zu, angrily.
So Huang Zu put the impudent speaker to death. Even at the very point of death,
Mi Heng never ceased his railing and abuse.
“Alas!” sighed Liu Biao when he heard Mi Heng’s fate. Then Liu Biao had
the victim honorably interred near Yingwu, on Parrot Island.
And a later poet wrote of Mi Heng:
Huang Zu could brook no rival; at his word
Mi Heng met death, beneath the cruel sword.
His grave on Parrot Isle may yet be seen,
The river flowing past it, coldly green.
Cao Cao heard of the young man’s death with pleasure.
“The putrid bookworm has just cut himself up with his own sharp tongue,”
said he.
As there was no sign of Liu Biao coming to join him, Cao Cao began to think of
coercion. Xun Yu dissuaded him from this course.
Said he, “Yuan Shao is not subjugated; Liu Bei is not destroyed. To attack
Liu Biao would be to neglect the vital to care for the immaterial. Destroy the
two chief enemies first, and the Han River is yours at one blow.”
And Cao Cao took the advice.
After the departure of Liu Bei, Dong Cheng and his fellow conspirators did
nothing else day or night but try to evolve plans for the destruction of Cao
Cao. But they could see no chance to attack. At the new year audience Cao Cao
was odiously arrogant and overweening, and the chief conspirator’s disgust
was so intense that he fell ill.
Hearing of the State Uncle’s indisposition, the Emperor sent the Court
Physician to see him. The Court Physician at this time was a native of Luoyang,
named Ji Ping. A very famous physician, Ji Ping devoted himself wholly to the
treatment of his court patient. Living in Dong Cheng’s palace and seeing Dong
Cheng at all times, Ji Ping soon found that some secret grief was sorely
troubling him. But Ji Ping dared not ask questions.
One evening of the full moon festival, when the physician was just taking his
leave, Dong Cheng kept him, and the two men had supper together. They eat
talking for some time, and Dong Cheng by and by dropped off to sleep dressed as
he was.
Presently Wang Zifu and the others were announced. As they were coming in, Wang
Zifu cried, “Our business is settled!”
“I should be glad to hear how,” said Dong Cheng.
“Liu Biao has joined Yuan Shao, and five hundred thousand troops in fifty
legions are on their way here by different routes. More than this, Ma Teng and
Han Sui are coming from the northwest with seven hundred thousand Xiliang
troops. Cao Cao has moved every soldier outside Xuchang to meet the combined
armies. There is a great banquet in his palace tonight. If we get together our
young men and servants, we can muster more than a thousand, and we can surround
the palace, while Cao Cao is at the banquet, and finish him off. We must not
miss this.”
Dong Cheng was more than delighted. He called his servants and armed them, put
on his own armor and mounted his horse. The conspirators met, as they had
arranged, just at the inner gate of the Prime Minister’s palace. It was the
first watch. The small army marched straight in, Dong Cheng leading with his
treasured sword drawn. His intended victim was at table in one of the private
rooms. Dong Cheng rushed in, crying, “Cao Cao, you rebel, stay!” and dashed
at Cao Cao who fell at the first blow.
And just then he woke up and found it was all a dream, but his mouth was still
full of curses.
“Do you really wish to destroy Cao Cao?” said Ji Ping, going forward to his
half awakened patient.
This brought Dong Cheng to his senses. He stopped, terror stricken, and made no
reply.
“Do not be frightened, O Uncle,” said the doctor. “Although I am a
physician, I am also a man, and I never forget my emperor. You have seemed sad
for many days, but I have never ventured to ask the reason. Now you have shown
it in your dream, and I know your real feelings. If I can be of any use, I will
help. Nothing can daunt me.”
Dong Cheng covered his face and wept.
“I fear you may not be true to me,” cried he.
Ji Ping at once bit off a finger as a pledge of his faith. And then his host
and patient brought forth the decree he had received in the girdle.
“I am afraid our schemes will come to nought,” said Dong Cheng. “Liu Bei
and Ma Teng are gone, and there is nothing we can do. That was the real reason
I fell ill.”
“It is not worth troubling you gentlemen with, for Cao Cao’s life lies in
these hands of mine,” said Ji Ping.
“How can that be?”
“Because he is often ill with deep-seated pain in his head. When this comes
on, he sends for me. When next he calls me, I only have to give him one dose
and he will certainly die. We do not want any weapons.”
“If only you could do it! You would be the savior of the dynasty. It depends
upon you.”
Then Ji Ping went away leaving his late patient a happy man. Dong Cheng
strolled into the garden and there he saw one of his servants, Quin Quington,
whispering with one of the concubines, Yun Ying, in a dark corner. This annoyed
him, and he called his attendants to seize them. He would have put them to
death but for the intervention of his wife. At her request he spared their
lives, but both were beaten forty canes, and the lad was thrown into a dungeon.
Sulky at this treatment, Quin Quington broke out of the cell in the night,
climbed over the wall, and went straight to Cao Cao’s palace, where he
betrayed the conspiracy.
Cao Cao at once had him taken into a secret chamber and questioned him.
Quin Quington gave the names of the conspirators, saying, “Wang Zifu, Wu
Zilan, Chong Ji, Wu Shi, Ma Teng, and my master have been meeting secretly. My
master has a roll of white silk, with writing on it, but I do not know what it
means. Yesterday, Ji Ping bit off one of his fingers as a pledge of fidelity. I
saw that.”
Quin Quington was kept in a secret part of the palace, while his late master,
Dong Cheng, only knowing that he had run away, took no special means to find
him.
Soon after this Cao Cao feigned a headache and sent for Ji Ping as usual.
“The rebel is done for,” thought Ji Ping, and he made a secret package of
poison which he took with him to the palace of the Prime Minister. He found Cao
Cao in bed. The patient bade the doctor prepare a potion for him.
“One draught will cure this disease,” said Ji Ping.
He bade them bring him a pot, and he prepared the potion in the room. When it
had simmered for some time and was half finished, the poison was added, and
soon after the physician presented the draught. Cao Cao, knowing it was
poisoned, made excuses and would not swallow it.
“You should take it hot,” said the doctor. “Then there will be a gentle
perspiration, and you will be better.”
“You are a scholar,” said Cao Cao, sitting up, “and know what is the
correct thing to do. When the master is ill and takes drugs, the attendant
first tastes them; when a man is ill, his son first tastes the medicine. You
are my confidant and should drink first. Then I will swallow the remainder.”
“Medicine is to treat disease. What is the use of anyone’s tasting it?”
said Ji Ping.
But he guessed now the conspiracy had been discovered, so he dashed forward,
seized Cao Cao by the ear, and tried to pour the potion down his throat. Cao
Cao pushed it away, and it spilt. The bricks upon which it fell were split
asunder. Before Cao Cao could speak, his servants had already seized the
assailant.
Said Cao Cao, “I am not ill. I only wanted to test you. So you really thought
to poison me!”
He sent for a score of sturdy gaolers who carried off the prisoner to the inner
apartments to be interrogated. Cao Cao took his seat in a pavilion, and the
hapless physician, tightly bound, was thrown to the ground before him. The
prisoner maintained a bold front.
Cao Cao said, “I thought you were a physician. How dared you try to poison
me? Someone incited you to this crime. If you tell me, I will pardon you.”
“You are a rebel. You flout your Prince and injure your betters. The whole
empire wishes to kill you. Do you think I am the only one?”
Cao Cao again and again pressed the prisoner to tell what he knew, but he only
replied that no one had sent him and it was his own desire.
“I have failed, and I can but die,” added Ji Ping.
Cao Cao angrily bade the gaolers give him a severe beating, and they dogged him
for two watches. His skin hung in tatters, the flesh was battered, and the
blood from his wounds ran down the steps. Then fearing he might die and his
evidence be lost, Cao Cao bade them cease and remove him. They took him off to
a quiet place where he might recover somewhat.
Having issued orders to prepare a banquet for next day, Cao Cao invited all the
courtiers thereto. Dong Cheng was the only one who excused himself, saying he
was unwell. The other conspirators dared not stay away as they felt they would
be suspected.
Tables were laid in the private apartments, and after several courses the host
said, “There is not much to amuse us today, but I have a man to show you that
will sober you.”
“Bring him in!” Cao Cao said, turning to the gaolers, and the hapless Ji
Ping appeared, securely fastened in a wooden collar. He was placed where all
could see him.
“You officials do not know that this man is connected with a gang of evil
doers who desire to overturn the government and even injure me. However, Heaven
has defeated their plans, but I desire that you should hear his evidence.”
Then Cao Cao ordered the gaolers to beat their prisoner. They did so till Ji
Ping lay unconscious, when they revived him by spraying water over his face. As
soon as he came to, he glared at his oppressor and ground his teeth.
“Cao Cao, you rebel! What are you waiting for? Why not kill me?” cried Ji
Ping.
Cao Cao replied, “The conspirators were only six at first; you made the
seventh. Is that true?”
Here the prisoner broke in with more abuse, while Wang Zifu and the other three
conspirators exchanged glances, looking as though they were sitting on a rug
full of needles. Cao Cao continued his torture of the prisoner, beating him
into unconsciousness and reviving him with cold water, the victim disdaining to
ask mercy. Finally Cao Cao realized he would incriminate none of his
accomplices, and so he told the gaolers to remove Ji Ping.
At the close of the banquet, when the guests were dispersing, four of them, the
four conspirators, were invited to remain behind to supper. They were terrified
so that their souls seemed no longer to inhabit their bodies, but there was no
saying nay to the invitation.
Presently Cao Cao said, “Still there is something I want to speak about, so I
have asked you to stay for a time longer. I do not know what you four have been
arranging with Dong Cheng.”
“Nothing at all,” said Wang Zifu.
“And what is written on the white silk?” asked Cao Cao.
They all said they knew nothing about it.
Then Cao Cao ordered the runaway servant to be brought in. As soon as Quin
Quington came, Wang Zifu said, “Well, what have you seen and where?”
Quin Quington replied, “You five very carefully chose retired places to talk
in, and you secretly signed a white roll. You cannot deny that.”
Wang Zifu replied, “This miserable creature was punished for misbehavior with
one of Uncle Dong Cheng’s maids, and now because of that he slanders his
master. You must not listen to him.”
“Ji Ping tried to pour poison down my throat. Who told him to do that if it
was not Dong Cheng?” said Cao Cao.
They all said they knew nothing about who it was.
“So far,” said Cao Cao, “matters are only beginning, and there is a
chance of forgiveness. But if the thing grows, it will be difficult not to take
notice of it.”
The whole four vigorously denied that any plot existed. However Cao Cao called
up his henchmen, and the four men were put into confinement.
Next day Cao Cao with a large following went to the State Uncle’s palace to
ask after his health.
Dong Cheng came out to receive his visitor, who at once said, “Why did you
not come last night?”
“I am not quite well yet and have to be very careful about going out,”
replied Dong Cheng.
“One might say you were suffering from national sorrow, eh?” said Cao Cao.
Dong Cheng started. Cao Cao continued, “Have you heard of the Ji Ping
affair?”
“No. What is it?”
Cao Cao smiled coldly, saying, “How can it be you do not know?”
He turned to his attendants and told them to bring in the prisoner, while he
went on talking to his host about national illness.
Dong Cheng was much put about and knew not what to do. Soon the gaolers led in
the physician to the steps of the hall. At once the bound man began to rail at
Cao Cao as rebel and traitor.
“This man,” said Cao Cao, pointing to Ji Ping, “has implicated Wang Zifu
and three others, all of whom are now under arrest. There is one more whom I
have not caught yet.”
“Who sent you to poison me?” continued Cao Cao, turning toward the
physician. “Quick, tell me!”
“Heaven sent me to slay a traitor!”
Cao Cao angrily ordered them to beat Ji Ping again, but there was no part of
his body that could be beaten. Dong Cheng sat looking at him, his heart feeling
as if transfixed with a dagger.
“You were born with ten fingers. How is it you have now only nine?”
Ji Ping replied, “I bit off one as a pledge when I swore to slay a
traitor.”
Cao Cao told them to bring a knife, and they lopped off his other nine fingers.
“Now they are all off. That will teach you to make pledges.”
“Still I have a mouth that can swallow a traitor and a tongue that can curse
him,” said Ji Ping.
Cao Cao told them to cut out his tongue.
Ji Ping said, “Do not. I cannot endure any more punishment, I shall have to
speak out. Loosen my bonds.”
“Loose them. There is no reason why not,” said Cao Cao.
They loosed him. As soon as he was free, Ji Ping stood up, turned his face
toward the Emperor’s palace and bowed, saying, “It is Heaven’s will that
thy servant has been unable to remove the evil.”
Then he turned and smashed his head into the steps and died.
His body was quartered and exposed. This happened in the first month of the
fifth year of Rebuilt Tranquillity (AD 200), and a certain historian wrote a
poem:
There lived in Han a simple physician.
No warrior, yet brave
Enough to risk his very life
His Emperor to save.
Alas! He failed; but lasting fame
Is his; he feared not death;
He cursed the traitorous Prime Minister
Unto his latest breath.
Seeing his victim had passed beyond the realm of punishment, Cao Cao had Quin
Quington led in.
“Do you know this man, Uncle?”
“Yes,” cried Dong Cheng. “So the runaway servant is here. He ought to be
put to death!”
“He just told me of your treachery. He is my witness,” said Cao Cao. “Who
would dare kill him?”
“How can you, the First Minister of State, heed the unsupported tale of an
absconding servant?”
“But I have Wang Zifu and the others in prison,” said Cao Cao. “And how
can you rebut their evidence?”
He then called in the remainder of his followers and ordered them to search
Dong Cheng’s bedroom. They did so and found the decree that had been given
him in the girdle and the pledge signed by the conspirators.
“You mean rat!” cried Cao Cao. “You dared do this?”
He gave orders to arrest the whole household without exception. Then he
returned to his palace with the incriminating documents and called all his
advisers together to discuss the dethronement of the Emperor and the setting up
of a successor.
Many decrees, blood written, have issued, accomplishing nothing,
One inscribed pledge was fraught with mountains of sorrow.
The reader who wishes to how the fate of the Emperor must read the next
chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 24 ****
assembly of Cao Cao’s advisers to consider the deposition of Emperor Xian.
Cheng Yu spoke strongly against this, saying, “Illustrious Sir, the means by
which you impress the world and direct the government is the command of the
House of Han. In these times of turmoil and rivalry among the nobles, such a
step as the deposition of the ruler will certainly bring about civil war and is
much to be deprecated.”
After reflection Cao Cao abandoned the project. But Dong Cheng’s plot was not
to go unpunished. All five of the conspirators with every member of their
households, seven hundred at least, were taken and put to death at one or
another of the gates of the city. The people wept at such merciless and
wholesale slaughter.
A secret decree in a girdle sewn,
In red blood written, the Emperor’s own,
To the staunch and faithful Dong Cheng addressed,
Who had saved him once when enemies pressed.
And who, sore grieved at his Sovereign’s fate,
Expressed in dreams his ceaseless hate,
Carried misfortune and death in its train,
But glory to him who died in vain.
Another poet wrote of the sad fate of Wang Zifu and his friends:
Greatheartedly these signed the silken roll,
And pledged themselves to save their king from shame.
Alas! Black death of them took heavy toll,
To write their names upon the roll of fame.
But the slaughter of the conspirators and their whole households did not
appease the wrath of the Prime Minister. The Emperor’s consort was a sister
of Dong Cheng; and, sword in hand, Cao Cao went into the Forbidden City
determined to slay her also. The Emperor cherished her tenderly, the more so as
she was then in the fifth month of pregnancy. That day, as they often did, the
Emperor, Consort Dong, and Empress Fu were sitting in their private apartment
secretly talking of the decree entrusted to Dong Cheng and asking each other
why nothing seemed to have been done. The sudden appearance of the angry Prime
Minister, armed as he was, frightened them greatly.
“Does Your Majesty know that Dong Cheng conspired against me?” said he.
“Dong Zhuo died long ago,” replied the Emperor.
“Not Dong Zhuo —-Dong Cheng!” roared Cao Cao.
The Emperor’s heart trembled, but he gasped out, “Really I did not know!”
“So the cut finger and the blood written decree are all forgotten, eh?”
The Emperor was silent. Cao Cao bade his lictors seize Consort Dong. The
Emperor interposed asking pity for her condition.
But Cao Cao said, “If Heaven had not interposed and defeated the plot, I
should be a dead man. How could I leave this woman to work evil to me by and
by?”
Said the Emperor, “Immure her in one of the palaces till her confinement. Do
not harm her now!”
“Do you wish me to spare her offspring to avenge the mother?” said Cao Cao.
“I pray that my body may be spared mutilation and not put to shame,” said
Consort Dong.
Cao Cao bade his men show her the white silk cord. The Emperor wept bitterly.
“Do not hate me in the below realms of the Nine Golden Springs,” said the
Emperor to her.
His tears fell like rain. Empress Fu also joined in the lament, but Cao Cao
said, “You are behaving like a lot of children.”
And he told the lictors to take Consort Dong away and strangle her in the
courtyard.
In vain had the fair girl found favor in the sight of her lord.
She died, and the fruit of her womb perished.
Stern and calm her lord sat, powerless to save.
Hiding his face while tears gushed forth.
When leaving the Palace, Cao Cao gave strict orders to the keepers, saying
“Anyone of the imperial relatives by marriage who enter the Palace will be
put to death, and the guards will share the same punishment for lack of
zeal.”
To make more sure he appointed three thousand Imperial Guards from his own
troops and appointed Cao Hong to the command.
Then said Cao Cao to his counselor Cheng Yu, “The conspirators in the capital
have been removed, it is true, but there are yet two others, Ma Teng and Liu
Bei. These must not be left.”
Cheng Yu replied, “Ma Teng is strong in the west and would not be easily
captured. He might be enticed to the capital by suave words and kindly praises,
when he would be at your mercy. Liu Bei is at Xuzhou, strongly posted in an ox-
horn formation, and not to be lightly attacked. More than this, Yuan Shao is at
Guandu, and his one desire is to attack you. Any attempt on the east will send
Liu Bei to Yuan Shao for help, and Yuan Shao will come here at once. Then what
will you do?”
“You are at fault,” replied Cao Cao. “Liu Bei is a bold warrior. If we
wait till he is fully fledged and winged, he will be more difficult to deal
with. Yuan Shao may be strong, but he is not to be feared. He is too undeciding
to act.”
As they were discussing these things, Guo Jia came in, and Cao Cao suddenly
referred the matter to him.
“If I attack Liu Bei, then Yuan Shao is to be feared. What do you think of
it?”
Guo Jia said, “Yuan Shao by nature is dilatory and hesitating, and his
various advisers are jealous of each other. He is not to be feared. Liu Bei is
getting together a new army and has not yet won their hearts. You could settle
the east in one battle.”
“This advice is in harmony with my thinking,” said Cao Cao.
And he prepared an army of two hundred thousand troops, to move in five
divisions against Xuzhou.
Scouts took the news of these preparations to Xuzhou. Sun Qian first went to
Xiapi to tell Guan Yu and then went to Xiaopei to tell Liu Bei. The two
discussed the position and decided that help must be sought. So letters were
written to Yuan Shao and given to Sun Qian, who went north, sought Tian Feng,
and asked him to arrange an interview with Yuan Shao. Sun Qian was introduced
and presented his letters.
But Yuan Shao was of melancholy countenance, and his dress was all awry. Tian
Feng said, “Why this disarray, my lord?”
“I am about to die,” replied Yuan Shao.
“But why do you utter such words?”
“I have three sons, but only the youngest is clever enough to understand my
ideas. Now he is suffering from scabies which places his life in jeopardy.
Think you that I have any heart to talk over any other affairs?”
“But,” said Tian Feng, “the present combination of circumstances is
unparalleled. Cao Cao is going to attack the east, and Xuchang will be empty.
You can enter it with a few volunteers and so perform good service to the
Emperor and save the people from sorrow. You have only to make up your mind to
act.”
“I know the chance is excellent, but I am worried and distressed and fear
failure.”
“What are you distressed about?” said Tian Feng.
“Among my sons only this special one is remarkable; and if anything happens,
I am done.”
Thus it became evident that no army would be dispatched.
In confirmation of this, Yuan Shao said to Sun Qian, “Go home and tell Liu
Bei the real reason, and say that if anything untoward happen, he can come over
to me, and I will find some means of helping him.”
Tian Feng struck the ground with his staff.
“It is such a pity!” cried he. “Just as a unique opportunity presents
itself, everything is spoiled by the illness of a child.”
He went out. Sun Qian saw that no help could be hoped for and set out to
return. When he had arrived and related what he had seen, Liu Bei was quite
alarmed and asked what could be done.
“Do not be troubled, brother,” said Zhang Fei. “We can destroy Cao Cao
merely by a sudden attack before his army shall have time to camp.”
“That would be according to the rules of war,” said Liu Bei. “You have
always been a bold warrior, and that move against Liu Dai shows that you are
becoming a strategist too.”
So Liu Bei gave Zhang Fei command of enough soldiers to carry out this plan.
Now while Cao Cao was in the midst of his march toward Xiaopei, a tornado
sprang up and the howling gale tore down one of the banners and broke the
staff. Cao Cao called together his advisers and leaders to ask them what this
portended.
Xun Yu said, “From what direction was the wind at the time, and what was the
color of the flag?”
“The wind was from the southeast, and the flag was blue and red.”
“There is only one interpretation: A raid on the camp will occur tonight.”
Cao Cao nodded. At that moment Mao Jie entered and reported a similar incident.
Cao Cao asked him the portent.
“My thinking tells me it means a night raid,” replied he.
Alas for the weakness of this descendant of kings!
He placed his faith on a night raid.
But the broken staff of a banner warned his enemy.
Why should the ancient of days favor the wicked?
“This is evidently providence,” said Cao Cao.
And he began to make preparations. He told off nine bodies of troops to take
stations, leaving only one of them as if camped while he placed the others in
ambush at eight points.
There was but little moonlight as Liu Bei and Zhang Fei marched their
respective armies toward Cao Cao’s camp. They had left Sun Qian to guard
Xiaopei. Zhang Fei, since he was the originator of the stratagem, led the way
with some light horse. As they drew near, everything seemed very quiet and no
one seemed moving. Then suddenly lights flashed out all about them, and Zhang
Fei saw he had fallen into a trap. At once from all the eight directions came
out the ambushing troops. From east, west, north, south were Zhang Liao, Xu
Chu, Li Dian, and Yu Jin. From northeast, northwest, southeast, southwest were
Xiahou Dun, Xiahou Yuan, Xu Huang, and Yue Jing.
Zhang Fei, dashing this way and rushing that, guarding his van and protecting
his rear, vainly tried to clear himself. The soldiers he had, being originally
Cao Cao’s troops, soon gave in and returned to their old leader. The position
became very desperate.
Zhang Fei met Xu Huang and engaged him, but his rear was also attacked by Yue
Jing. At length he cut an alley out and with a half score of his troops started
to return to Xiaopei. The retreat was cut off. He thought to make for Xuzhou
but felt certain that way was also barred. No other way seemed open, and so he
made for the Mangdang Hills.
As Liu Bei drew near the camp, he intended to attack when he heard the din of
battle. Then he was attacked in the rear and very soon had lost half his force.
Next Xiahou Dun came to attack. Thereupon Liu Bei bolted. He was pursued by
Xiahou Yuan. Presently Liu Bei looked about him and found he had less than half
a hundred soldiers following him. He set his face in the direction of Xiaopei.
But before long Liu Bei saw that place was in flames. So he changed his plan
and went toward Xiapi. However he found the whole countryside full of the
enemy, and he could not get through. So he bethought himself of the promise of
Yuan Shao, that he would find refuge if things went unfavorable, and determined
to go to Yuan Shao till he could form some other plan. Wherefore he took the
Qingzhou road. But it also was blocked, and he went into the open country and
made his way north, not without being pursued and losing the remainder of his
few followers.
He hastened toward Qingzhou City, traveling one hundred miles a day. When he
reached the city and summoned the gate, the guards asked who he was and they
told the Governor, who was Yuan Shao’s eldest son, Yuan Tan. Yuan Tan was
greatly surprised, but he opened the gates and went to meet Liu Bei, whom he
treated with due consideration.
Liu Bei told the story of his defeat and said he wished for harbor. He was
given suitable quarters and hospitably entertained, while the young man wrote
to inform his father. Then Yuan Tan provided an escort and sent Liu Bei on his
journey as far as the boundary of Pingyuan.
At the city of Yejun, Liu Bei was met by Yuan Shao in person ten miles outside
the city, with a great escort. Liu Bei made a humble obeisance which Yuan Shao
hastened to return and said, “I have been very distressed that, on account of
my son’s illness, I did not come to your aid. It is a great joy to see you;
the one desire of my life is satisfied.”
Liu Bei replied, “The poor Liu Bei you see here has long desired to take
refuge with you, but fate has hitherto denied him that privilege. Now attacked
by Cao Cao, my family lost, I remembered that you, General, would receive good
people from all sides. Wherefore I put my pride in my pocket. I trust that I
may be found worthy and one day I will prove my gratitude.”
Yuan Shao received him with much pleasure and treated him exceedingly well. And
they both lived in Yuan Shao’s home region Jizhou.
After the capture of Xiaopei, Cao Cao pressed on toward Xuzhou City, which,
after a short defense and the flight of Mi Zhu and Jian Yong, was surrendered
by Chen Deng. Cao Cao led his army into the city, restored order, and pacified
the people. Next he wanted to press on to Xiapi, where Guan Yu was holding out
and keeping guard of Liu Bei’s family.
Xun Yu said, “Guan Yu is there, in charge of his brother’s family, and he
will defend the city to the last. If you do not take it quickly, Yuan Shao will
get it.”
Cao Cao said, “I have always loved Guan Yu, both for his warlike abilities
and his principles. I would engage him to enter my service. I would rather send
someone to talk him into surrender.”
“He will not do that,” said Guo Jia. “His sense of right is too solid. I
fear anyone who went to speak with him would suffer.”
Then suddenly a man stepped out, saying, “I know him slightly, and I will
go.”
The speaker was Zhang Liao.
Cheng Yu looked at him and said, “Though you are an old acquaintance, I do
not think you are equal to talking over Guan Yu. But I have a scheme that will
so entangle him that he will have no alternative. He will have to enter the
service of the Prime Minister.”
They set the fatal spring beside the lordly tiger’s trail,
They hide the hook with fragrant bait to catch the mighty whale.
How Guan Yu was to be entrapped will be told in the next chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 25 ****
The plan to seduce Guan Yu from allegiance to his brothers was now announced by
Cheng Yu, “Since Guan Yu is far braver than ordinary warriors, he can only be
overreached by superior cunning. Now send some of the captured soldiers who
have lately been of Liu Bei’s army into Xiapi, where they shall say they have
come back. They shall thus be our allies on the inside. Then an attack and a
feigned defeat will entice Guan Yu to a distance from the city. And his return
road shall be cut.”
Cao Cao accepted the scheme, and a few score of the troops who had lately been
in Xuzhou were sent to the city. Guan Yu believed the story they told and
trusted them. So they were suffered to remain.
After this part of the game had been played, Xiahou Dun led forward five
thousand troops against the city. At first, Guan Yu would not accept the
challenge. But provoked by men sent to hurl insults at him from the foot of the
wall, his wrath got the better of him, and he moved out with three thousand
troops. After the leaders had exchanged some ten bouts, Xiahou Dun made to run
away. Guan Yu pursued. Xiahou Dun stopped and made a stand, then he fled again.
Thus alternately fighting and retiring, he enticed Guan Yu seven miles from
Xiapi. Then Guan Yu suddenly remembering the risk to the city drew off his army
to return homeward.
Soon, at the sound of a signal bomb, from the left and right out moved two
bodies of troops led by Xu Huang and Xu Chu who barred his way. Guan Yu
hastened along a road that seemed to offer retreat, but from both sides his
ambushing enemies shot their crossbows, and the arrows flew like locusts on the
wing. No way past was found, and he turned back. Then both bodies joined in
attacking him. He drove them off and got into the road to his own city, but
soon Xiahou Dun came up again and attacked fiercely as before. Evening came and
still Guan Yu was hemmed in, so he went up on a low hill of Tushan Mountains
upon which he encamped for a rest.
Guan Yu was surrounded on all sides by enemies. By and by, looking toward his
city, he saw the glow of fire. It meant that the traitors, who had come in to
surrender, had opened the gate, and the enemy had gone in force. They had made
the fires in order to perplex and distress Guan Yu, and indeed the sight
saddened him.
In the night he made efforts to escape from the hill, but every attempt was
checked by flights of arrows. At daybreak he prepared for one more effort, but
before moving he saw a horseman riding up at full speed and presently discerned
Zhang Liao.
When within speaking distance, Guan Yu said, “Are you come to fight me, Zhang
Liao?”
“No,” replied Zhang Liao. “I am come to see you because of our old
friendship.”
Wherefore Zhang Liao threw aside his sword, dismounted, and came forward
saluting. And the two sat down.
“Then naturally you have come to talk me over,” said Guan Yu.
“Not so!” said Zhang Liao. “Sometime ago you saved me. Can I help saving
you?”
“Then you desire to help me.”
“Not exactly that,” replied Zhang Liao.
“Then what are you doing here if you have not come to help me?”
“Nothing is known of the fate of your elder brother, nor whether your younger
brother is alive or dead. Last night your city fell into the hands of Cao Cao,
but neither soldiers nor people were harmed, and a special guard was set over
the family of Liu Bei lest they should be alarmed. I came to tell you how well
they had been treated.”
“This is certainly talking me over,” said Guan Yu. “Though escape is
impossible, yet I am not perturbed. I look upon death as going home. You had
better depart quickly and let me go down and begin the struggle again.”
“Surely you must know everybody will ridicule you when they hear of this,”
said Zhang Liao.
“I shall die for loyalty and righteousness. Who will laugh?” said Guan Yu.
“You would be guilty of three faults if you died.”
“Tell me them,” said Guan Yu.
“First of all, you and your elder brother pledged yourselves in the Peach
Garden to die or to live together. Now your brother has been defeated, and you
want to fight to the death. Therefore, if your brother appears again by and by
and wants your help, he will seek it in vain. Is this anything else than
betraying the Peach Garden Oath? Secondly, you are in charge of your
brother’s family and, if you fought and died, the two women would be left
forlorn and without a protector. That would be a betrayal of trust. Thirdly,
your military skill stands out conspicuous and will go down in history. If you
do not aid your brother in his noble attempt to maintain the dynasty, then all
your labors and sufferings will have been spent to win a worthless reputation
as a valiant fool. Where is the sense in that? I feel it my duty to point out
these three faults to you.”
Guan Yu remained silent and thought for some time.
Then he said, “You have spoken of my three faults. What do you desire?”
“You are surrounded with the certainty of death if you do not yield. There is
no advantage in a useless death. Wherefore your best course is to yield to Cao
Cao till you hear news of Liu Bei and can rejoin him. Thus you will ensure the
safety of the two ladies and also keep inviolate the Peach Garden compact. You
will preserve a useful life. Brother, you must reflect on these things.”
“Brother, you have spoken of three advantages; now I have three conditions.
If the Prime Minister concede these, then will I doff my armor. If he refuses,
then I prefer to be guilty of the three faults and die.”
“Why should the Prime Minister not concede them? He is most liberal and large
minded. I pray you let me hear your conditions.”
“The first is that as I and the Imperial Uncle have sworn to support the
Hans, I now submit to the Emperor and not to His Prime Minister Cao Cao. The
second condition is that suitable provision be made for the two ladies under my
care and that no one shall be allowed to approach them. The third is that I
shall be allowed to set off to rejoin Uncle Liu Bei so soon as I shall hear
where he is, whether it be far or near. I require all these to be satisfied.
Failing a single one, I will not submit. Wherefore, Zhang Liao, I pray you
hasten back and announce them.”
Zhang Liao lost no time but rode back to Cao Cao. When he spoke of Guan Yu’s
intention to submit to the Hans but not to Cao Cao, the latter laughed, saying,
“As I am a minister of Han, so am I Han. I grant that.”
Zhang Liao then spoke of provision due to their rank and security from
molestation for the ladies, to which Cao Cao replied, “I will give them twice
the regular amount for an Uncle of the Emperor. As for securing them from
molestation, that is simple. The ordinary domestic law is enough. Why should
there be any doubt?”
Then said Zhang Liao, “Whenever he shall get news of the whereabouts of Liu
Bei, he must go to him.”
At this Cao Cao shook his head, saying, “Then I am merely to feed Guan Yu.
What is the use of this? I cannot consent.”
Zhang Liao replied, “You must know of Yu Rang’s saying: The difference in
behavior brought about by difference of treatment? Liu Bei treats Guan Yu just
kindly and liberally. You can surely engage Guan Yu’s heart and support by
being kinder and more liberal.”
“What you say is much to the point. I will grant the three conditions,”
said Cao Cao.
Whereupon Zhang Liao left to carry the news to Guan Yu, still on the summit of
the Tushan Mountains.
Said Guan Yu, “Now I expect the army to withdraw so that I may enter the city
to tell the two ladies what has been arranged. After that I submit at once.”
Zhang Liao rode back once more with this request, and the order was given for
the army to retire three miles.
“Do not do this,” said Xun Yu. “I fear treachery.”
“He will certainly not break faith,” said Cao Cao. “He is too high
principled.”
The army retired, and Guan Yu with his force reentered the city of Xiapi, where
he saw that the people were following their ordinary avocations in
tranquillity. He came to the palace and went in to see the two ladies, who
hastened to meet him.
He bowed to them below the steps and said, “I apologize for having caused you
to feel alarmed.”
“Where is the Uncle?” asked they.
“I know not whither he has gone.”
“What do you intend to do, brother-in-law?”
“I went out of the city to try a last battle. I was surrounded on a hill top,
and Zhang Liao has urged me to yield. I proposed three conditions, all of which
were conceded, and the enemy drew off to allow me to return to the city. Unless
I have your decision, sisters-in-law, I scarcely dare to take any final
step.”
They asked what were the conditions and were told.
Lady Gan said, “When Cao Cao’s army came in, we took it to mean certain
death. But it is scarcely credible that not a hair of our heads has been
disturbed. Not a soldier has dared enter our doors. You have accepted the
conditions, brother-in-law, and there is no need to ask our consent. Our only
fear is that he will not let you go by and by to search for the Uncle.”
“Sisters-in-law, you need not be anxious. I will see to that.”
“You must decide everything and need not ask us.”
Guan Yu withdrew and then, with a small escort, went to his interview with Cao
Cao. Cao Cao came to the outermost gate to welcome him, and Guan Yu dismounted
and made obeisance. Cao Cao returned his salute with the greatest cordiality.
“The leader of a defeated army is grateful for the graciousness that has
preserved his life,” said Guan Yu.
“I have so long admired your loyalty and high principles that this happy
meeting gratifies the desire of my whole life,” replied Cao Cao.
“As the Prime Minister has granted the three requests which my friend
petitioned for on my behalf, there is now but little to discuss,” said Guan
Yu.
“As I have spoken, so be it. I could not break faith,” replied Cao Cao.
“Whenever I hear where Uncle Liu Bei is, I must certainly go to him, even if
through fire and water. It may be that there will be no time nor opportunity of
saying farewell. I trust you will understand the reason.”
“If Liu Bei should prove to be alive, you must certainly be allowed to go to
him. But I fear that in the confusion he may have lost his life. You may set
your mind at rest and let me make inquiries.”
Guan Yu thanked him. Then a banquet was prepared in Guan Yu’s honor. Next day
the army started on its homeward march.
For the journey to the capital, a carriage was prepared for the two ladies, and
Guan Yu was its guard. On the road they rested at a certain post station, and
Cao Cao, anxious to compromise Guan Yu by beguiling him into forgetfulness of
his duty, assigned Guan Yu to the same apartment as his sisters-in-law. Guan Yu
stood the whole night before the door with a lighted candle in his hand. Not
once did he yield to fatigue. Cao Cao’s respect for him could not but
increase.
At the capital the Prime Minister assigned a dignified residence to Guan Yu,
which he immediately divided into two enclosures, the inner one for the two
ladies and the other for himself. He placed a guard of eighteen of his veterans
over the women’s quarters.
Guan Yu was presented to Emperor Xian who conferred upon him the rank of
General Who Serves the Hans. Guan Yu expressed his thanks to the Emperor. Next
day Cao Cao made a great banquet, inviting all his advisers and officers,
solely in honor of Guan Yu, who sat in the seat of honor. Beside this Guan Yu
received presents of silks and gold and silver vessels, all of which Guan Yu
sent into the ladies’ quarters for their use and keeping. In fact from the
day of arrival in the capital, Guan Yu was treated with marked respect and
distinction, small banquets following each other in each three days, and large
banquets held in each five days.
Cao Cao also presented him with ten most lovely serving girls. Guan Yu sent
these also within to wait upon his two sisters-in-law.
Every third day Guan Yu went to the door of the women’s quarters to inquire
after their welfare, and then they asked if any news of the wanderer had come.
This ceremony closed with the words: “Brother-in-law, you may retire when you
wish.”
Cao Cao heard of this extremely correct behavior and thought all the more of
the man for it.
One day Cao Cao noticed that the robe Guan Yu was wearing was old and frayed.
Taking his measurements, Cao Cao had a new one made of fine brocade and
presented it to him. Guan Yu took it and put it on under the old robe, so that
the latter covered it.
“Why so very thrifty?” laughed Cao Cao.
“It is not thrift,” was his reply. “The old robe was a gift from my
brother, and I wear it because it reminds me of him. I could not allow the new
gift to eclipse his old one.”
“How very high principled!” said Cao Cao, sighing.
One day when Guan Yu was at home, there came a messenger to say that the two
women had thrown themselves on the ground and were weeping. They would not say
why.
Guan Yu set his dress in order, went over, and knelt by the door, saying,
“Why this grief, sisters-in-law?”
Lady Gan replied, “In the night I dreamed that the Uncle had fallen into a
pit. I woke up and told Lady Mi, and we think he must be dead. So we weep.”
“Dreams are not to be credited,” he replied. “You dreamed of him because
you were thinking of him. Pray do not grieve.”
Just then Guan Yu was invited to another banquet, so he took leave of the
ladies and went. Seeing Guan Yu looked sad and tearful, his host asked the
reason.
“My sisters-in-law have been weeping for my brother, and I cannot help being
sad in sympathy.”
Cao Cao smiled and tried to cheer up his guest. Cao Cao plied Guan Yu with wine
so that Guan Yu became quite intoxicated and sat stroking his beard and saying,
“What a useless thing am I! I could do no service for my country, and I have
parted from my elder brother.”
“How many hairs in your beard?” suddenly asked his host.
“Some hundreds, perhaps. In the autumn a few fall out, but in the winter it
is fullest. Then I use a black silk bag to keep the hairs from being broken,”
replied Guan Yu.
Cao Cao had a bag made for him to protect his beard. Soon after when they were
at court, the Emperor asked what was the bag he saw on Guan Yu’s breast.
“My beard is rather long, Your Majesty,” said Guan Yu. “So the Prime
Minister gave me a bag to protect it.”
The Emperor bade him take off the bag and show his beard in all its fullness
and it fell in rippling waves below his breast.
“Really a most beautiful beard!” said the Emperor.
This is why people call him: “The Man with the Beautiful Beard.”
Another time, after a banquet, Cao Cao was seeing his guest start from the gate
of his palace when he noticed that his charger was very thin.
“Why is it so thin?” said Cao Cao.
“My worthless body is rather heavy and really too much for it. It is always
out of condition.”
Cao Cao at once told his attendants to bring out a certain steed, and before
long it appeared. It was red, like glowing charcoal, and a handsome creature in
every way.
“Do you recognize it?” asked Cao Cao.
“Why, it is no other than Red Hare!” cried Guan Yu.
“Yes, it is Red Hare,” said Cao Cao.
And he presented the horse, all fully caparisoned, to his guest.
Guan Yu bowed many times and thanked him again and again, till Cao Cao began to
feel displeased and said, “I have given you many things, lovely handmaids and
gold and silks and never won a bow of gratitude from you before. This horse
seems to please you better than all the rest. Why do you think so poorly of the
damsels and so much of the steed?”
“I know the horse: It can travel three hundred miles a day, and I am very
lucky to get him. Now as soon as I find out where my brother is, I can get to
him in a single day,” said Guan Yu.
Cao Cao grumbled to himself and began to repent of his gift.
Fortune dealt a stunning blow, still he played his part;
Partitioning his dwelling proved his purity of heart.
The crafty minister desired to win him to his side,
But felt that failure was foredoomed however much he tried.
Said Cao Cao to Zhang Liao, “I have treated Guan Yu pretty liberally, but he
still cherishes the desire to leave me. Do you know if it is really so?”
“I will try to find out,” was the reply.
So Zhang Liao took an early opportunity of seeing Guan Yu, and when the
politeness of the visit were over, Zhang Liao said, “I recommended you to the
Prime Minister, and you have not lost much by that.”
“I am deeply affected by his kindness and bounty,” said Guan Yu, “but,
though my body is here, yet I am always thinking of my brother.”
“Your words do not express present conditions quite correctly. One who lives
in the world without discrimination and consideration of his relations with
others is not the most admirable type of person. Even Liu Bei never treated you
better than does the Prime Minister. Why then do you maintain this desire to
get away?”
“I know only too well that he has been most kind, but I have also received
great kindness from Uncle Liu Bei. Beside we have sworn to die together, and I
cannot remain here. But before I go, I must try to render the Prime Minister
some signal service to prove my gratitude.”
“Supposing Liu Bei should have left the world, whither will you go?” said
Zhang Liao.
“I will follow him to the below realms of Nine Golden Springs.”
There could no longer be the least doubt as to Guan Yu’s intentions, and
Zhang Liao told Cao Cao just how matters stood. Cao Cao sighed.
“To serve one’s chief with unswerving fidelity is a proof of the highest
principle of all,” said he.
Said Xun Yu, “He spoke of performing some act of service before leaving. If
he gets no chance of such a thing, he will not be able to go.”
Cao Cao agreed that this was so.
Liu Bei went to Yuan Shao for refuge. Here Liu Bei was always sorrowful and,
when asked the reason, said he did not know where his brothers were nor what
had happened to his family since they fell into the hands of Cao Cao.
“Why should I not be sad when I have failed towards my country and my
family?” said he.
“I have long wished to attack Xuchang,” said Yuan Shao. “Now it is autumn
and just the time for an expedition, so let us discuss plans for the
destruction of Cao Cao.”
Tian Feng at once opposed this.
“When Cao Cao attacked Xuzhou and Xuchang was undefended, you let the chance
slip by. Now that Xuzhou has been captured, and their soldiers are flushed with
victory, it would be madness to attempt it. It is necessary to await another
chance.”
“Let me think about it,” said Yuan Shao.
He asked advice from Liu Bei whether to attack or to hold on.
Liu Bei replied, “Cao Cao is a rebel. I think you are failing in your duty if
you do not attack him.”
“Your words are good,” said Yuan Shao.
He made up his mind to move. But again the adviser Tian Feng intervened.
Then Yuan Shao grew angry, saying, “You fellows who cultivate literature and
despise war have made me miss a lot!”
Tian Feng bowed his head and said, “Neglect your servant’s wise words, and
you will fail in the field.”
Yuan Shao was so angry that he wanted to put Tian Feng to death. However, Liu
Bei begged him off and he was only imprisoned.
Seeing the fate of his colleague, another adviser, Ju Shou, assembled his clan
and distributed among them all his possessions, saying, “I go with the army.
If we succeed, then nothing can exceed our glory; but if we are defeated, the
risk I run is great.”
His friends wept as they said farewell.
General Yan Liang was appointed to the command of the advance guard, to go to
attack Baima.
Then Ju Shou first protested, “His mind is too narrow for such a post. He is
brave but unequal to such a trust.”
“You are not the sort of man to measure my best generals,” replied Yuan
Shao.
The army marched to Liyang, and Governor Liu Yue of Dongjun sent an urgent call
to Xuchang for aid. Cao Cao moved his armies hastily.
As soon as the news of battle got about, Guan Yu went to see the Prime Minister
and said, “Illustrious Sir, the army is mobilized. I volunteer for the van
leader.”
“I scarcely dare put you to such inconvenience, but presently, if need
arises, I will call upon you.”
So Guan Yu retired, and one hundred fifty thousand soldiers marched out in
three directions. On the road the letters from Liu Yue arrived praying for
help, and Cao Cao marched the first fifty thousand troops to Baima and took up
a position supported by the hills. In the wide plains in front of them, Yan
Liang was encamped with one hundred thousand veterans.
Cao Cao was frightened at the force opposed to him and, returning to camp,
spoke to Song Xian, who had once served under Lu Bu, saying, “You are one of
Lu Bu’s famous veteran generals. Can you give battle to this Yan Liang?”
Song Xian agreed to try. He armed himself, mounted, and rode to the front. Yan
Liang was there on horseback, his sword lying crossways. Seeing an opponent
approaching, he uttered a loud shout and galloped toward Song Xian. The two
met, but after only three bouts, Song Xian fell under a mighty slash from Yan
Liang’s sword.
“What a terrible leader!” said Cao Cao.
“He has slain my comrade, I want to go and avenge him,” then cried Wei Xu.
Cao Cao bade him go and he rode out, spear set, and in front of the army railed
at Yan Liang.
Yan Liang replied not a word, but their two steeds came together; and at the
first blow from Yan Liang’s sword, Wei Xu’s forehead was halved.
“Now, who again dares face him?” cried Cao Cao.
Xu Huang took up the challenge and he went out. The combat endured twenty
bouts, and then Xu Huang fled back to his own side. The other generals were now
greatly depressed at their failure. Cao Cao withdrew his army, feeling very sad
at the loss of two generals in quick succession. Yan Liang also marched off his
force.
Then Cheng Yu went to see his chief, saying, “I can produce a man the equal
of Yan Liang.”
“Who?” cried Cao Cao.
“No other than Guan Yu.”
“I am afraid that if he is given an opportunity to perform that return
service he spoke of, he will leave me.”
“If Liu Bei is still alive, he is with Yuan Shao. If you get Guan Yu to
defeat Yuan Shao’s army, Yuan Shao will look askance at Liu Bei and put him
to death. Liu Bei gone, where can Guan Yu go?”
This argument appealed to Cao Cao at once, and he sent to request Guan Yu to
come.
Previous to obeying the call, Guan Yu went to say farewell to his sisters-in-
law.
“You may get news of the Uncle on the journey,” said they.
“Yes,” said Guan Yu and left them.
Armed with his green-dragon saber, riding on the swift steed Red Hare, and
having but a slender following, Guan Yu was not long in arriving at Baima. He
saw Cao Cao, who told him what had happened. Yan Liang was too valiant for any
to face.
“Let me look at him,” said Guan Yu.
Then wine was served for his refreshment, and while they were drinking, it was
reported that Yan Liang once again offered a challenge. So Cao Cao and his
guest and staff went to the summit of a hill whence the enemy could be seen.
Cao Cao and Guan Yu sat on the hill top, and the commanders stood about them.
Cao Cao pointed out Yan Liang’s troops arrayed on the plains below. The
ensigns and banners waving fresh and bright amid the forest of spears and
swords made a grand and imposing spectacle.
“See how formidable these soldiers of the North of Yellow River are,” said
Cao Cao.
“I regard them as so many clay fowls and mud dogs,” said Guan Yu.
Cao Cao pointed out Yan Liang, saying, “There under that grand umbrella, in
that embroidered robe and that silver breastplate and riding on horseback and
gripping that huge sword is Yan Liang.”
“His head looks as though it was stuck on a pole for sale,” said Guan Yu,
just glancing over the army at his feet.
“He is very terrible. You must not despise him,” said Cao Cao.
Guan Yu rose, saying, “I am a poor thing, but I will go over and bring you
his head if you like.”
“Joking is not allowed in this army,” interposed Zhang Liao. “Please be
careful what you say, General.”
Guan Yu quickly mounted, turned down his mighty weapon, and galloped down the
hill, his phoenix eyes rounded, and his silkworm eyebrows fiercely bristling.
He dashed straight into the enemy’s array, and the northern soldiers opened
like falling waves and dissolving storms. He made directly for the commander.
Now Yan Liang sitting there in state saw a horseman rushing toward him, and
just as he began to ask who the rider of the red horse was, lo! the horseman
was there. Taken utterly by surprise, the leader could make no defense. Guan
Yu’s arm rose and the mighty weapon fell. And with it fell Yan Liang.
Leaping from the saddle, Guan Yu cut off his victim’s head and hung it to his
horse’s neck. Then he mounted and rode out, just as if there was no army
there.
The northern troops, panic stricken, made no fight. Cao Cao’s army attacked
with full force and slew great numbers of them. They captured many horses and
weapons and much military gear. Guan Yu rode quickly back up the hill and laid
the proof of his prowess at the feet of the Prime Minister.
“You are more than human, General!” cried Cao Cao.
“What have I done to talk about?” said Guan Yu. “My brother, Zhang Fei,
did the same thing in an army of a hundred legions, and did it as easily as
picking something from his own pocket.”
Cao Cao marveled at the statement and turning to those about him said, “If
you meet this Zhang Fei, be careful.”
And he bade them make a note on the overlap of their robes so that they should
remember.
The beaten army returning northward met Yuan Shao on the road and told their
story.
“A red-faced warrior with a long beard, wielding a huge, long-handled sword,
broke into the army, cut off the General’s head and bore it off,” said
they.
“Who was this?” asked Yuan Shao.
Ju Shou said, “It must have been Liu Bei’s brother, Guan Yu. It could be
nobody else.”
Yuan Shao was very angry and, pointing to Liu Bei, he said, “Your brother has
slain my beloved leader. You are in the plot too. Why should I save you
alive?”
He bade the lictors take Liu Bei away and behead him.
Morning saw him guest on high.
Evening, prisoner, doomed to die.
Liu Bei’s actual fate will be told in the next chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 26 ****
Liu Bei spoke up, however, and said, “Pray hear one word, Illustrious Sir,
before you decide. I have lost sight of my brother since my misfortune at
Xuzhou and know not whether Guan Yu be dead or alive. There are many men in the
world who resemble him. Is every red-faced man with a beard named Guan Yu?
Should you not rather seek some evidence?”
Now Yuan Shao was impulsive and facile by nature, and when Liu Bei spoke thus,
he suddenly turned upon Ju Shou, saying, “By wrongly regarding what you said,
I nearly killed an innocent person.”
Then Yuan Shao requested Liu Bei once more to resume his seat in the tent and
give advice on how to avenge Yan Liang.
Soon from the lower end a voice was heard, saying, “Yan Liang and I were as
brothers, and can I allow any other to avenge his death?”
The speaker was a man of eight-span height with a face like a jilin, a famous
leader from the North of Yellow River, named Wen Chou.
Yuan Shao was pleased and said, “You are the only man who can do it. I will
give you one hundred thousand troops, and you can cross the Yellow River, and
quickly smite that rebel Cao Cao.
“You cannot do it. Wen Chou will fail,” said Ju Shou. “The proper course
is to hold Yenjin and detach a force to Guandu. If you rashly cross the river
and anything goes wrong, not a soul will return.”
Yuan Shao said, “That is always the way with you fellows, always delaying and
taking the dash out of the army. You put off today and postpone tomorrow till
success has become impossible. Do you forget that promptitude is what each
soldier honors?”
The adviser withdrew sadly, saying, “Superiors do not curb their ambitions;
inferiors crave for achievements; things are undone. Eternal is the course of
Yellow River, shall I change it?”
Thereafter Ju Shou feigned illness and went no more to the council.
Liu Bei said, “I have received much kindness at your hands and have been
unable to show my gratitude. I would accompany General Wen Chou that I may
repay your bounty and also that I may hear news of my brother.”
Yuan Shao gladly consented and ordered Wen Chou to share his command with Liu
Bei.
But the former objected, saying, “Liu Bei has been so often defeated that it
will augur ill for success this time. Since you wish, I will give Liu Bei
command of the rear guard of thirty thousand soldiers.”
And this being approved, three legions were told off under Liu Bei’s special
command to follow the main body.
The prowess displayed by Guan Yu in the bold attack on Yan Liang redoubled Cao
Cao’s respect for him, and Cao Cao memorialized the Throne that Guan Yu
receive the title of Lord of Hanshou, and a seal was cast for him.
Just then came the unexpected news that Yuan Shao’s army had moved toward the
Yellow River and was in position above Yenjin. Cao Cao first sent to transfer
the inhabitants to the west bank and then led out an army to oppose Yuan Shao.
He issued an order to face about, thus placing the rear companies in front. The
commissariat wagons were also placed in the van.
“What is this reversal for?” asked Lu Qian.
Cao Cao replied, “When the supplies are in rear, they are liable to be
plundered. So I have put them first.”
“But if you meet the enemy and they steal them?”
“Wait till the enemy appears. I shall know what to do.”
Lu Qian was much exercised at this new move of the Prime Minister. In the
meantime the supply train moved along the river toward Yenjin. Presently the
foremost troops raised a great shout, and Cao Cao sent to see what it meant.
The messenger came back, saying, “Wen Chou’s army is approaching, and the
supply train has been abandoned and is at the mercy of the enemy. The main body
is still far behind. What to do next?”
Thereupon Cao Cao pointed to two mounds, saying, “We will take refuge here
for the present.”
All those near him hastened to the mounds. There Cao Cao ordered them all to
loosen their dress, lay aside their breastplates, and rest a time. The horsemen
turned their steeds loose.
Wen Chou’s soldiers approached under cover. As they drew near, the officers
told Cao Cao, saying, “The rebels are near. We ought to catch the horses and
go back to Baima.”
But Adviser Xun You checked them, saying, “These are a bait for the enemy.
Why retire?”
Cao Cao glanced across at him and said, “He understands. Do not say
anything.”
Now having got possession of the supply carts, the enemy next came to seize the
horses. By this time they had all broken ranks and were scattered, each soldier
going his own way. Then suddenly Cao Cao gave the order to go down from the
mounds and smite them.
The surprise was complete. Wen Chou’s army was in confusion, and Cao Cao’s
army surrounded them. Wen Chou made a stand, but those about him trampled each
other down, and he could do nothing but flee. And he fled.
Then standing on the top of a mound Cao Cao pointed to the flying leader,
calling out, “There is one of the most famous generals of the north. Who can
capture him?”
Zhang Liao and Xu Huang both mounted and dashed after him, crying, “Wen Chou,
do not run away!”
Looking round, the fugitive saw two pursuers, and then he set aside his spear,
took his bow and adjusted an arrow, which he shot at Zhang Liao.
“Cease shooting, you rebel!” shouted Xu Huang.
Zhang Liao ducked his head, and the shaft went harmlessly by, save that it
carried away the tassel of his cap. He only pressed harder in pursuit. The next
arrow however struck his horse in the head, and the animal stumbled and fell,
throwing its rider to the earth.
Then Wen Chou turned to come back. Xu Huang, whirling his battle-ax, stood in
his way to stop Wen Chou. But Xu Huang saw behind Wen Chou several more
horsemen coming to help; and as they would have been too many for him, he fled.
Wen Chou pursued along the river bank. Suddenly he saw coming toward him with
banners fluttering in the breeze, a small party of horse, and the leader
carried a great sword.
“Stop!” cried Guan Yu, for it was he, and he attacked at once.
At the third bout Wen Chou’s heart failed him, and he wheeled and fled,
following the windings of the river. But Guan Yu’s steed was fast and soon
caught up. One blow, and the hapless Wen Chou fell.
When Cao Cao saw from the mound that the leader of the enemy had fallen, he
gave the signal for a general onset, and half of the northern army were drowned
in the river. And the carts with supplies and all the horses were quickly
recovered.
Now Guan Yu, at the head of a few horsemen, was thrusting here and striking
there at the moment when Liu Bei, with the thirty thousand reserve troops,
appeared on the battle field on the other bank of the river. At once they told
him that the red-faced, long-bearded warrior was there and had slain Wen Chou.
Liu Bei hastily pressed forward to try to get a look at the warrior. He saw
across the river a body of horse and the banners bore the words Guan Yu, Lord
of Hanshou.
“Then it is my brother, and he is really with Cao Cao,” said Liu Bei,
secretly thanking God that Guan Yu was safe.
Liu Bei made an attempt to wait about till he could call to Guan Yu, but a
great mass of Cao Cao’s soldiers came rushing down, and he was forced to
retire.
Yuan Shao, bringing reinforcements, reached Guandu and built a stockade.
Two advisers, Guo Tu and Shen Pei, went in to see him and said, “Again that
fellow Guan Yu has been in the battle. He killed Wen Chou. Liu Bei pretends
ignorance of him.”
Their master was angry and railed at Liu Bei, “The long-eared rebel! How dare
he do such a thing?”
Soon Liu Bei appeared. Again Yuan Shao ordered him out to instant execution.
“What crime have I committed?” asked Liu Bei.
“You sent your brother to slay one of my generals. Is that no crime?”
“Pray let me explain before I die. Cao Cao hated me and has always done so.
Now he has found out where I am and, fearing that I may help you, has got my
brother to destroy your two generals, feeling sure that when you heard of it,
you would be angry and put me to death. You cannot fail to see this.”
“What he says is sense,” said Yuan Shao, turning to his advisers, “and
you two nearly brought on me the reproach of injuring the good.”
Yuan Shao ordered his attendants to retire and asked Liu Bei to come and sit by
him.
Liu Bei came, saying, “I am deeply thankful, Illustrious Sir, for your great
kindness, for which I can never be sufficiently grateful. Now I desire to send
some confidential messenger with a secret letter to my brother to tell him
where I am, and I am sure he will come without a moment’s delay. He will help
you to destroy Cao Cao to make up for having destroyed your two officers. Do
you approve of this?”
“If I got Guan Yu, he would be ten times better than the Yan Liang and Wen
Chou that I have lost,” replied Yuan Shao.
So Liu Bei prepared a letter. But there was no one to take it. Yuan Shao
ordered the army to withdraw to Wuyang, where they made a large camp. For some
time nothing was done.
Then Cao Cao sent Xiahou Dun to defend the strategic points at Guandu while he
led the bulk of the army back to the capital. There he gave many banquets in
honor of the services of Guan Yu, and then he told Lu Qian that putting the
supplies in the front of the army had been meant as a bait to draw the enemy to
destruction.
“Only Xun You understood that,” said Cao Cao in conclusion.
Everyone present praised his ingenuity. Even while the banquet was proceeding,
there arrived news of a rising of Yellow Scarves rebels at Runan led by Liu Pi
and Gong Du. They were very strong, and Cao Hong had been defeated in several
engagements. Now he begged for help.
Guan Yu hearing this said, “I should like to have the opportunity of
performing some service by destroying these rebels.”
“You have already rendered noble services for which you have not been
properly requited. I could hardly trouble you again,” said Cao Cao.
“I have been idle too long. I shall get ill,” said Guan Yu.
Cao Cao then let him to go and gave him fifty thousand troops with Yu Jin and
Yue Jing as generals under him. They were to leave soon.
Then Xun Yu said privily to his master, “He always cherishes the idea of
returning to Liu Bei. He will leave you if he hears any news. Do not let him go
on this expedition.”
“If he does well this time, I will not let him go into battle again,” said
Cao Cao.
In due time the force led by Guan Yu drew near the rebels in Runan and made
their camp. One night, just outside his camp, two spies were caught and taken
in to Guan Yu who in one of them recognized Sun Qian. The attendants being
dismissed, Guan Yu questioned Sun Qian.
“After we lost sight of each other, I have heard not a word of you. What are
you doing here?” said Guan Yu.
“After I escaped, I drifted hither and thither till I had the good fortune to
reach Runan, and Liu Pi and Gong Du, the Yellow Scarves leaders, took me in.
But why are you with Cao Cao, General? And where are your sisters-in-law? Are
they well?”
Guan Yu told him all that had happened.
“I have heard lately that Liu Bei is with Yuan Shao. I would have liked to go
and join him, but I have not found a convenient opportunity. Now the two men I
am with have taken the side of Yuan Shao against Cao Cao. By good luck you were
coming here, so I got command of a small party of scouts to be able to see you
and tell you. Presently our two leaders will pretend to be defeated and you,
and the two ladies, can go over to Yuan Shao. And you will see your brother.”
“Since he is there, I certainly must go at once to see him. But it is a
misfortune that I have slain two of Yuan Shao’s generals. I fear things are
not in my favor,” said Guan Yu.
“Let me go first and see how the land lies. I will come back and tell you.”
“I would risk a myriad deaths to see my brother,” said Guan Yu. “But I
must go to say farewell to Cao Cao.”
Sun Qian was sent away that night, and next day Guan Yu led out his army to
offer battle. Gong Du, in armor, went out to the front of the line of battle,
and Guan Yu said, “You people, why have you risen against the government?”
“Why do you blame us when you have turned your back on your own lord?”
replied Gong Du.
“How have I turned my back on my lord?”
“Liu Bei is with Yuan Shao, and you are with Cao Cao. What is that?”
Guan Yu could not reply, but he whirled round his sword and rode forward. Gong
Du fled, and Guan Yu followed. Gong Du turned and said to Guan Yu, “Do not
forget your old chief’s kindness. Now attack as soon as you can, and I will
give up the defense.”
Guan Yu understood and urged on his troops. The leaders of the rebels pretended
they were worsted, and they all scattered. So Runan was retaken. Having
pacified the people, Guan Yu quickly led his army back to the capital, where he
was met by Cao Cao and congratulated on his success and feasted.
When this was all over, Guan Yu went to the dwelling of his sisters-in-law to
pay his respects at their gate.
“Have you been able to get any news of Uncle Liu Bei in your two
expeditions?” asked Lady Gan.
“None,” replied Guan Yu.
As he retired from the door, he heard sounds of bitter weeping within.
“Alas! He is dead,” said they. “Our brother-in-law thinks we shall be
greatly distressed; and thus, he hides the truth from us.”
One of the old soldiers, who acted as guard, hearing the sounds of perpetual
grief, took pity on them and said, “Do not weep, ladies. Your lord is with
Yuan Shao in the North of Yellow River.”
“How do you know that?” said they.
“I went out with General Guan Yu, and one of the soldiers told me.”
The two ladies summoned Guan Yu and reproached him, saying, “Uncle Liu Bei
never betrayed you, and yet you remain here enjoying the bounty of Cao Cao and
forgetting the old times. And you tell us falsehoods.”
Guan Yu bowed his head, saying, “My brother really is in the North of Yellow
River, but I dared not tell you, lest it should become known. Something must be
done, but done carefully, and it needs time.”
“Brother-in-law, you should hasten,” said Lady Gan.
Guan Yu withdrew feeling that he must evolve some scheme of departure without
further loss of time. It caused him much uneasiness.
Yu Jin, having found out that Liu Bei was in the north, told Cao Cao, who at
once sent Zhang Liao to find out Guan Yu’s intentions.
Zhang Liao entered jauntily and congratulated Guan Yu, saying, “They tell me
you obtained news of your brother in the battlefield. I felicitate you.”
“My lord was there indeed, but I met him not. I see nothing to be glad
about.”
“Is there any difference between the relationship of you two and that of any
other two brothers?”
Guan Yu replied, “You and I stand in the relationship of friends. Liu Bei and
I are friends and brothers beside, and prince and minister in addition to both.
Our relationship cannot be discussed in usual terms.”
“Well, now that you know where your brother is, are you going to him?”
“How can I go back on what I said before? I am sure you will explain fully to
the Prime Minister.”
Zhang Liao went back and told his master, who said, “I must find a way to
keep him here.”
While Guan Yu was pondering over his difficulties, they told him that a friend
had come to inquire for him. The visitor was introduced but Guan Yu did not
recognize him.
“Who are you?” asked Guan Yu.
“I am Chen Zhen of Nanyang, in the service of Yuan Shao.”
In great perturbation, Guan Yu sent away the attendants and, they being gone,
said, “There is some special reason for your visit?”
For reply Chen Zhen drew out a letter and handed it to his host, who recognized
that it was from his brother Liu Bei. The letter read:
“I, the writer, and you, Sir, pledged ourselves in the Peach Garden to die
together. Why then are we apart and yet alive, our kindly feelings destroyed,
our sense of right outraged? If you desire to obtain fame and acquire riches
and honor, I will offer my head without hesitation so that your achievement is
fulfilled. More might be said, but I await your commands with great anxiety.”
Guan Yu finished the letter with a bitter cry.
“I always wanted to find my brother, but I did not know where he was. How can
he think such evil of me?” said he.
“Liu Bei looks for you very eagerly. If you are still bound by the old
pledge, you should go quickly,” said Chen Zhen.
“Anyone born into the world without the essential virtue of sincerity is no
true human. I came here openly and can go in no other way. Now will I write a
letter which I will ask you to bear to my brother, that as soon as I can take
leave of Cao Cao, I will bring the ladies and come to him.”
“But what if Cao Cao refuse to let you go?” said Chen Zhen.
“Then would I rather die. I will not remain here.”
“Then, Sir, quickly write your letter and relieve your brother from his
anxiety.”
So Guan Yu wrote like this:
“I, the humble one, know full well that a human of principle does not betray
and a human of loyalty despises death. I have been a student in my youth and
know somewhat of the proprieties. I sigh and weep at the memory of the
fraternal affection that made Yangjue Ai and Zuo Botao die rather than
separate. I was in charge of Xiapi, but the place lacked provision and there
was no help. I would have fought to the death, but there was on my shoulders
the responsibility for my sisters-in-law. Wherefore I had to take care of my
body lest I betrayed your trust. And so I made a prisoner of myself, hoping to
find a way of release. I heard of you lately in Runan. I must, however, bid
farewell to Cao Cao and bring the ladies with me when I come. May I perish,
victim to the superhuman powers, if I have harbored any traitorous thought. Ink
and paper are poor substitutes for what I would say, but I look to see you
soon.”
Chen Zhen left with this missive, and Guan Yu went to tell the women. Then he
proceeded to the Prime Minister’s palace to say farewell. But Cao Cao knew
what he was coming for, and at the gate Guan Yu found the board intimating that
no one could be received. So he had to return. However, he bade his own few
soldiers prepare to start at any moment. He also gave orders that everything
received from Cao Cao was to be left in the quarters. Nothing was to be taken.
Next day he again proceeded to the palace to say farewell to his patron, but
again found the board hanging there to show there was no admission. So it was
several times; he could never enter. Then he went to see Zhang Liao, but Zhang
Liao was indisposed.
“This means Cao Cao will not let me go,” thought Guan Yu. “But I am
going, and I shall hesitate no longer.”
So he wrote this letter:
“As a young man I entered the service of the Imperial Uncle, and pledged
myself to share his fortunes. Heaven and Earth witnessed this oath. When I lost
the city, I made three requests which you granted. Now I hear my brother is
with Yuan Shao and I, remembering our pledge, cannot but go to him. Though your
bounty is great, I forget not the bond of the past; wherefore I write this
letter of farewell trusting that when you have read it, you will be content for
me to postpone to another season the proof of my gratitude.”
Guan Yu sealed and sent it to the palace. Then he deposited in the treasury of
his dwelling all the gold and silver he had received, hung his seal of lordship
of Hanshou in the middle of the reception hall and left, taking his sisters-in-
law with him in a carriage. He rode Red Hare and carried the green-dragon saber
in his hand. With a small escort of guards, those formerly under his command,
he left the city by the north gate.
The wardens would have stopped him, but Guan Yu frightened them with a fierce
shout. Having got out, he told the escort to go in front with the carriage
while he would remain behind to guard against pursuit. So they pushed the
carriage toward the high road.
In the city, Guan Yu’s letter reached the Prime Minister while he was
consulting about what to do. He read it and exclaimed, “So he has left!”
Then the warden of the gate came to report that Guan Yu had forced his way out,
and was gone with a carriage, a horse, and a score of guards. Next came the
servants from his house to report that he had left, taking nothing of the
treasure, nor anyone of the waiting maids. Everything was left in the house.
Even his seal was there. His only escort were the few soldiers of his original
force.
Suddenly from the assembly of officers rose a voice, saying, “With three
thousand of mailed horse, I will bring him back alive.”
Their eyes turned to the speaker, who was General Cai Yang.
On the dragon’s cave he turns his back,
But numberless wolves infest his track.
What came of this offer to pursue will be seen in the next chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 27 ****
Now of all the officers in Cao Cao’s army, the two friendly toward Guan Yu
were Zhang Liao and Xu Huang. The others treated Guan Yu with respect, except
Cai Yang who was decidedly inimical. So this Cai Yang was ready to pursue and
capture Guan Yu as soon as he heard of his departure. But Cao Cao accepted Guan
Yu’s going as natural.
“He does not forget his old leader, and he was perfectly open in all his
actions. He is a gentleman, and you would do well to follow his example,”
said Cao Cao.
So Cao Cao bade the would-be pursuer be gone and say no more about pursuit.
“You were exceedingly good to Guan Yu,” said Cheng Yu, “but he went off
very rudely. He certainly left a screed behind with his reasons, but he
affronted you, and that is no light matter. Now to let him join Yuan Shao is to
add wings to a tiger. You had better catch him and put him to death so as to
guard against future evil.”
Cao Cao replied, “But he had my promise, and can I break my word? Each has
his master. Do not pursue.”
But Cao Cao said to Zhang Liao, “He has rejected all I gave him, so bribes
were powerless with him in whatever shape. I have the greatest respect for such
as him. He has not yet gone far, and I will try to strengthen his attachment to
me and make one appeal to sentiment. Ride after him and beg him to stop till I
can come up and bid farewell and offer him a sum of money for his expenses and
a fighting robe, that he may remember me kindly in after days.”
So Zhang Liao rode out quite alone. Cao Cao followed him leisurely with an
escort of a score or so.
Now the steed that Guan Yu rode was Red Hare, and it was very fast. No one
could have come up with him but that there was the ladies’ carriage to
escort, and so Red Hare had to be held in and go slow. Suddenly Guan Yu heard a
shout behind him, a voice crying, “Go slowly, Guan Yu!”
He turned and made out the person to be Zhang Liao. Ordering the pushers of the
carriage to press on along the high road, he reined in his steed, held the
green-dragon saber ready for a stroke, and waited for Zhang Liao to come up.
“Of course you have come to take me back, Zhang Liao?” said Guan Yu.
“No. The Prime Minister, seeing that you are going a long journey, wishes to
see you on your way and told me to hasten forward and beg you to wait till he
can come up. That is the only thing.”
“Seeing that he is coming along with mailed men, I shall fight to the very
last,” said Guan Yu.
And he took up his position on a bridge where he waited the approach of the
party, who advanced quickly. Four of Cao Cao’s generals, Xu Chu, Xu Huang, Yu
Jin, and Li Dian, followed close. Seeing Guan Yu was ready to fight, Cao Cao
ordered his escort to open out in two lines, and then it was seen they carried
no arms. This relieved his mind, for it proved to Guan Yu they meant no attack.
“Why do you go in such haste, Guan Yu?” asked Cao Cao.
Guan Yu inclined his head but did not dismount, saying, “I informed you in
writing that since my lord was in the North of Yellow River, I had to leave at
once. I went to your palace again and again but was refused admittance. So I
wrote a letter of farewell, sealed up the treasure, resigned my lordship seal,
and left everything for you. I hope you recall the promise you once made me.”
Cao Cao replied, “My desire is to keep my troth with all people. I cannot go
back on my word. However, you may find the journey expensive, and therefore I
have here prepared a sum of money to help you.”
Then from horseback Cao Cao held out a packet of gold.
Guan Yu said, “I have sufficient left from your former bounty. Keep that for
presents to your soldiers.”
“Why should you refuse this? It is but an insignificant return for great
services.”
“My services have been all trifling, not worth mentioning.”
“Really, Guan Yu, you are the most high-principled of humans. I am very sorry
my luck is too poor to retain you at my side. Pray accept just this robe to
show you I am not quite ungrateful,” said Cao Cao.
And one of his generals, dismounting, held up a silken coat in both hands. Guan
Yu even still fearful of what might happen, would not dismount, but he reached
down his sword and took the robe on its point. Then he threw it over his
shoulders and turned to thank the giver.
“I thank you, Sir Prime Minister, for the robe and trust we shall meet
again.”
So saying, Guan Yu went down from the bridge and bore away to the north.
“He is a very rude man,” said Xu Chu, who was of the escort. “Why do you
not take him prisoner?”
Cao Cao replied, “He was absolutely alone facing scores of us. He was
justified in being suspicious. But my word has gone forth, and he is not to be
pursued.”
Cao Cao and his escort returned, the Prime Minister very sad when he thought of
the man who had gone.
Guan Yu went down from the bridge and started in the wake of the carriage
carrying the two ladies, which should have gone about ten miles while this
interview had been going on. He could see no signs of it and rode hither and
thither looking on all sides.
Presently he heard someone shouting from a hill, calling him by name to halt.
He saw a youth wearing a yellow turban and dressed in a silk robe. He held a
spear in his hand and was mounted on a horse from the neck of which dangled a
bloody head. Behind him were a hundred or so men on foot, and they advanced
quickly.
“Who are you?” asked Guan Yu.
The young man dropped his spear, dismounted, and made a low bow. Guan Yu feared
this was some ruse, so he only checked his horse and gripped his sword the more
firmly, saying, “Sir, I desire you to tell me your name!”
“My name is Liao Hua. I belong to a Xiangyang family. Since these troubled
times began I have been an outlaw among the rivers and lakes, and I and my
comrades have lived by plunder. We are about five hundred in all. By chance my
friend Du Yuan came across two ladies in a carriage just now; and, quite
wrongly, he took them prisoners and brought them to the hold in the hills. I
questioned the servants and so found out who they were and who was escorting
them. So I wished them to be set free to pursue their journey. Du Yuan opposed
this and spoke so ill-mannerly that I killed him. And here is his head. I pray
you pardon me.”
“Where are the two ladies?”
“They are among the hills,” replied Liao Hua.
“Bring them down here, at once,” said Guan Yu.
In a short time a party of the brigands pushed the carriage down the hill, and
the ladies sat there before him.
Then Guan Yu dismounted, laid aside his sword, and stood respectfully before
them with his arms crossed.
“Sisters, have you been alarmed?” asked he.
They replied, “We should have suffered at the hands of Du Yuan had it not
been for Liao Hua.”
“How did Liao Hua come to save the ladies?” asked Guan Yu of those who
stood by.
They said, “Du Yuan carried off the ladies and proposed that he and Liao Hua
should have one each as wife. But Liao Hua had found out they were of gentle
birth and worthy, and was for treating them with respect. When Du Yuan
disagreed, Liao Hua slew him.”
Hearing this Guan Yu bowed to Liao Hua and thanked him. Liao Hua then wanted to
join himself and his troop to Guan Yu, but Guan Yu, seeing he was a Yellow
Scarf, would have nothing to do with him. So Guan Yu simply thanked him for his
kindness to the ladies. Liao Hua offered some presents, but these were also
declined.
So Liao Hua took his leave and presently disappeared in a valley among the
hills. Guan Yu told his sisters the story of his interview with Cao Cao and the
gift of a robe, and then he urged the carriage on its way. Towards dark they
came to a farm where they would rest. The farmer, an old graybeard, came out to
welcome the party and asked who they were. Guan Yu described himself as the
brother of Liu Bei, and said his name.
“Surely you are no other than the slayer of Yan Liang and Wen Chou,” said
the venerable host.
“That is so,” replied Guan Yu.
“Come in,” said the old man, joyfully.
“My two sisters-in-law are in the carriage,” said Guan Yu. “Will you let
your women folks go out to receive them?”
As Guan Yu remained standing there, the host asked him to be seated, but he
would not sit while the women were present and remained standing in a
respectful attitude till the old man’s wife had returned and ushered the
ladies into the inner apartments. Then the old man set to the entertainment of
his guest in the guest hall. Guan Yu asked his name.
He replied, “I am called Hu Hua. In the days of the Emperor Huan, I was an
officer of the court, but I resigned and retired into private life. I have a
son, Hu Ban, with Governor Wang Zhi of Yingyang. If you should be going that
way, General, I should like to send him a letter by you.”
Guan Yu said he would take the letter. Next day, after an early meal, the
ladies got into their carriage, the host handed his letter to Guan Yu, and the
little party once more took the road. They went toward Luoyang.
Presently they approached a pass known as the Dongling Pass, guarded by
Commander Kong Xiu and five hundred soldiers. When the soldiers saw a carriage
being pushed toward the pass, they ran to tell their commander, who came out to
accost the travelers.
Guan Yu dismounted and returned the officer’s salute, and Kong Xiu said,
“Whither are you going?”
“I have left the Prime Minister to go into the North of Yellow River to find
my brother.”
“But Yuan Shao is my master’s rival. You have authority from him to go
thither?”
“I left hurriedly and could not get it.”
“If you have no authority, you must wait while I send to request orders.”
“To remain while you send and receive an answer will delay me greatly,”
said Guan Yu.
“I must stand by my instructions. That is the only thing to do,” said Kong
Xiu.
“Then you refuse to let me pass?”
“If you want to go through, leave the family as a gage.”
At this Guan Yu got very angry and made to cut at the commander on the spot,
but Kong Xiu withdrew into the gate and beat the drums for an attack. Thereupon
the soldiers armed themselves, mounted, and came down to oppose the passage,
crying, “Dare you go through, eh?”
The carriage was sent off to a safe distance, and then Guan Yu rode at full
speed directly at the commander, who set his spear and came to meet him. The
two steeds met and the men engaged, but at the first stroke of the green-dragon
saber the commander of the gate fell to the earth dead. His troops fled.
“Soldiers, do not flee!” cried Guan Yu. “I killed him because I could do
no otherwise. I have nothing against you, but I would ask you to tell the Prime
Minister how this thing came to pass, that Kong Xiu wished to kill me, and so I
slew him in self defense.”
The soldiers bowed before him, and Guan Yu, with the carriage, passed through
the gates and continued their way to Luoyang. But one of the guards of the pass
went quickly in advance and informed the Governor of Luoyang, Han Qu, of the
slaughter of Kong Xiu. Wherefore Han Qu assembled his officers to take counsel.
Meng Tan, one of his generals, said, “This Guan Yu must be a fugitive, or he
would have a safe conduct. Our only course is to stop him, or we shall incur
blame.”
“The man is fierce and brave. Remember the fate of Yan Liang and Wen Chou. It
seems vain to oppose him by force, and so we must think out some trap for
him,” said Han Qu.
“I have a ruse ready,” said Meng Tan. “I will close the gate with thorny
blockades, and I will go to fight with him. I will engage and then flee, and
you can shoot him from an ambush along the road. If we can get him and his
party and send them prisoners to the capital, we ought to be well rewarded.”
This course was determined upon, and soon they heard that Guan Yu was
approaching. Han Qu strung his bow and filled his quiver with arrows and with
one thousand soldiers took up position along the pass.
Then as the party approached, Han Qu said, “Who is the traveler who comes?”
Guan Yu bowed low and said, “He is a certain Guan Yu, Lord of Hanshou, and he
wishes to go through the pass.”
“Have you a letter from the Prime Minister?”
“In the hurry of departure I did not get any.”
“My special orders from him are to hold this pass and make examination of all
spies that may go to and fro. Any person without an authority must be a
fugitive.”
Then Guan Yu began to be angry, saying, “I have killed Kong Xiu at Dongling
Pass. Do you also seek death?”
“Who will capture him for me?” cried Han Qu, and Meng Tan offered himself.
He rode out, whirling his double swords, and made straight for Guan Yu.
Guan Yu sent back the carriage out of danger and then rode toward Meng Tan.
They engaged, but very soon Meng Tan turned his steed and fled. Guan Yu
pursued. Meng Tan, intent only on leading his enemy toward the ambush, took no
account of the speed of Red Hare. Very soon Meng Tan was caught up, and a
stroke of the mighty sword cut him in two pieces. Then Guan Yu stopped and
turned back. The archers in the gate shot their hardest; and though it was a
long way off, one of them lodged an arrow in his left arm. He pulled it out
with his teeth, but the blood streamed down as he rode toward Governor Han Qu.
The men scattered. Guan Yu rode straight at his next victim. He raised his
sword and made an oblique cut which sliced off the head and shoulder of Han Qu.
Then Guan Yu drove off the soldiers and returned to escort the carriage. He
bound up his wound, and, fearing lest anyone might take advantage of his
weakness, he made no long halts on the road but hurried toward River Si Pass.
The warden of this pass was Bian Xi of Bingzhou, a warrior whose weapon was a
comet-hammer. He had been a Yellow Scarf and had gone over to Cao Cao, who had
given him this post. As soon as he heard of the coming of the redoubtable Guan
Yu, he cudgeled his brains for a ruse to use against him. He decided upon an
ambush. In the State Guardian Temple at the pass he placed two hundred ax-men
and swordsmen. He reckoned on enticing Guan Yu to the temple for refreshment,
and when he let fall a cup as signal, the hidden ruffians would rush out.
All being thus arranged and ready, he went out to welcome Guan Yu in friendly
guise, and Guan Yu dismounted at his coming. Bian Xi began very amiably.
“Your name, General, makes the very earth tremble, and everyone looks up to
you. This return to the Imperial Uncle proves you to be noble and true.”
Guan Yu in reply told him the story of the men he had slain in the last two
passes.
Bian Xi replied, “You slew them; that is well. When I see the Prime Minister,
I will explain to him the inner reasons for these acts.”
Guan Yu thought he had found a friend and so mounted and rode through the pass.
When he came to the temple, a number of priests came out to meet him with
clanging bells.
This temple, named State Guardian Temple, had a courtyard in which the Emperor
Ming had burned incense in the past. In the temple were thirty priests, and
among these there happened to be one Pu Jing who came from the same village as
Guan Yu. His religious name was Transverse Peace. Hearing who the visitor was,
Transverse Peace came forward to speak with him.
“General,” said Transverse Peace, “it is many a long year since you left
Pudong.”
“Yes,” said Guan Yu, “nearly twenty years.”
“Do you recognize this poor priest?”
“I left the village many years ago; I do not recognize you.”
“My house and yours were only separated by a rivulet,” said the priest.
Now Bian Xi, seeing Transverse Peace holding forth about village matters,
thought Transverse Peace would blab about the ambush, so Bian Xi bade him be
silent.
“I want to invite the General to a feast. You priest fellows seem to have a
lot to say,” said Bian Xi.
“Not too much,” said Guan Yu. “Naturally when fellow villagers meet, they
talk of old times.”
Bian Xi invited the visitor into the guest room to take tea, but Guan Yu said,
“The two ladies are out there in the carriage. They ought to have some
first.”
So the priest bade them take some tea to the ladies, and then he led Guan Yu
within, at the same time lifting the priest knife which he wore at his side and
looking meaningfully at Guan Yu. The latter understood and told his people to
bring along his weapon and keep close at his side.
When Bian Xi invited Guan Yu to go into the Hall of the Laws for some
refreshment, Guan Yu turned to him, saying, “Is this invitation with good
intention or evil?”
Bian Xi was so taken aback that he could make no reply, and then Guan Yu saw
that many armed men were concealed behind the arras.
Then Guan Yu shouted loudly at Bian Xi, saying, “What means this? I thought
you an honorable man. How dare you?”
The traitor saw that his plot had failed and called to the assassins to come
out and fall to, but Guan Yu had a short sword in his hand and slashed at
anyone who came near. So they scattered. Their commander ran down the hall and
tried to escape among the side buildings, but Guan Yu threw aside the short
sword, took up the green-dragon saber and went after Bian Xi. The latter was
trying to get into position to throw his comet-hammer, but Guan Yu cut the cord
and the weapon was useless. Guan Yu followed Bian Xi in and out and soon caught
up with him. Then with one blow Guan Yu cut him in halves.
The fight over, Guan Yu sought the two ladies, who were surrounded by soldiers.
These fled at sight of the terrible warrior. Seeking out the priest, his fellow
countryman, he thanked him for the timely warning which had saved him from
death.
“I cannot remain here after this,” said Transverse Peace. “I shall pack
up my few garments and my alms bowl and take to the road, vague in my
wanderings as the clouds in the sky. But we shall meet again and till then take
care of yourself.”
Then Guan Yu took leave and retook the road to Yingyang. The Governor of this
city was named Wang Zhi, and he was related to Han Qu by their children’s
marriage. Hearing of the death of his relative, Wang Zhi set about a scheme to
kill Guan Yu secretly. He sent soldiers to guard the city gates and, when he
heard that Guan Yu approached, he went himself and received Guan Yu with a
smiling countenance and bade Guan Yu welcome. Guan Yu told him the object of
his journey.
“You, General, have been able to get some exercise on the road, but the
ladies in their carriage must be cramped and fatigued. I pray you come into the
city, and all of you remain the night in the official travelers’ quarters.
Tomorrow you can set forth again.”
The offer was tempting, and his host seemed in earnest, so the two ladies went
into the city, where they found everything very comfortably prepared for them.
And, though Guan Yu declined the Governor’s invitations to a banquet,
refreshments for the travelers were sent to their lodgings. Guan Yu was
fatigued from the trials of the journey, and as soon as the evening meal was
over, he bade the ladies retire to rest while he sat down in the main room,
quite alone, for he bade all to get repose while they could. His horse was
given a good feed for once. He sat with his armor loosened in order to be more
at ease.
Now Governor Wang Zhi had a general named Hu Ban to whom he had entrusted the
arrangements for the destruction of his guest.
Said Wang Zhi, “This Guan Yu is a traitor to the Prime Minister and a
fugitive. On the road he has murdered several pass commanders and is guilty of
serious crimes. But he is too strong and valiant for any ordinary soldier to
overcome. So this evening you will lead a whole company of a thousand troops to
surround his lodging, each one armed with a torch, and we will burn him. They
will start the fire about midnight. Everyone of the party will perish. I will
come with a force to stand by and assist if necessary.”
These orders received, Hu Ban passed them on to the soldiers, who began
secretly to prepare dry wood and other combustibles which they piled up at the
gate of the rest house. Hu Ban thought within himself that he would like to
know what manner of man was this Guan Yu, whose fame had spread so far, so he
determined to get a peep at the guest. He went to the rest house and inquired
where Guan Yu was.
“The General is the man in the main hall reading,” was the reply.
Hu Ban noiselessly made his way to the outside of the room and peeped in. He
saw the famous warrior stroking his beard with his left hand while he read by
the light of a lamp placed on a low table. An involuntary exclamation of wonder
escaped at the majesty of the figure.
“Really a god!” Hu Ban sighed.
“Who is there?” suddenly asked the reader at the sound.
Hu Ban entered and said, “I am Hu Ban, a general of the Governor.”
“Surely you are the son of Hu Hua, who lives outside Xuchang,” said Guan
Yu.
“I am he,” replied Hu Ban.
Then Guan Yu called up his followers and bade them look among the baggage for
the letter, which they brought. Guan Yu handed it to the general.
Hu Ban read it and then breathed long, saying, “I very nearly caused the
death of a good man.”
Then he betrayed the whole plot, saying, “This Wang Zhi is a wicked man, who
wanted to kill you. At this moment you are surrounded, and at the third watch
they will set fire to this place. Now I will go and open the city gates while
you hastily prepare for flight.”
Guan Yu was greatly surprised, but he quickly buckled up his armor, got his
steed ready, roused the two ladies, and put them into their carriage. Then they
left the rest house; and as they passed out, they saw the soldiers all about
them, each with a torch. The party hastened to the outskirts of the city and
found the gate already open, and they lost no time in getting clear of the
city. Hu Ban returned to give orders to fire the rest house.
The fugitives pressed on. But before long they saw lights coming up behind
them, and Wang Zhi called out to them to stop.
Guan Yu reined in his horse and began to abuse him, crying, “Worthless
fellow! What had you against me that you wished to burn me to death?”
Wang Zhi whipped up his steed and set his spear, but Guan Yu cut him through
with the short sword he wore at his side and scattered his followers.
Then the carriage pushed on. Guan Yu’s heart was filled with gratitude to Hu
Ban.
When the party drew near Huazhou, someone told Liu Yue, who rode out to welcome
him. Liu Yue had been once rescued by Guan Yu, who slew Yan Liang and Wen Chou
and lifted the siege of the city.
Guan Yu did not dismount but bowed from horseback, saying, “Have you been
quite well since we parted?”
“Whither are you going, Sir?” replied Liu Yue.
“I have left the Prime Minister and am on my way to find my brother.”
“Liu Bei is with Yuan Shao, who is at enmity with the Prime Minister. How can
you be allowed to go to him?” asked Liu Yue.
“That matter was settled long ago.”
“The Yellow River Ferry is an important point and is guarded by a commander
of Xiahou Dun. He will not let you cross.”
“But suppose then you provide boats for me?”
“Though there are boats, I dare not give them to you.”
“Well, formerly I slew Yan Liang and Wen Chou and saved you a grave danger.
Now you refuse me a ferry boat!”
“I am afraid Xiahou Dun will know of it and make it a fault against me.”
Guan Yu perceived that no help was to be expected from this man, so he pushed
on and presently reached the ferry. There the Commander of the Guard, Qin Qi,
came out to question him.
“I am one Guan Yu, Lord of Hanshou.”
“Whither are you bound?”
“I go to the North of Yellow River to seek my brother, Liu Bei, and I
respectfully ask you to grant me a passage over the river.”
“Where is the authority of the Prime Minister?”
“I am not on a mission from the Prime Minister, so why should I have such an
authority?”
“I have orders from my chief to guard the ferry, and you will not cross. Even
if you grew wings, you should not fly over.”
Guan Yu’s choler arose.
“Do you know that I have been the death of all those who have hitherto tried
to stop me?” said he.
“You have only slain a few officers of no rank or reputation; but you dare
not kill me!”
“Where would you stand beside Yan Liang and Wen Chou?” asked Guan Yu.
Qin Qi grew angry, and he loosed his rein. Sword in hand, he came at a gallop.
The two met, but in the first encounter Qin Qi’s head was swept off by the
terrible green-dragon saber.
“He who opposed me is dead! You others need not be afraid,” cried Guan Yu.
“Be quick and prepare me a boat.”
The boat was soon at the landing, and the two women stepped on board, followed
by Guan Yu. They crossed and were then in the country of Yuan Shao. In the
course of his journey to this point, Guan Yu had forced five passes and slain
six generals.
His seal hung up, the treasury locked, his
courtly mansion left,
He journeyed toward his brother dear, too long
from his side left.
The horse he rode was famed for speed as for
endurance great,
His good sword made a way for him and
opened every gate.
His loyalty and truth forth stand, a pattern
unto all,
His valor would frighten rushing streams and
make high mountains fall.
Alone he traveled lustily, this was death to meet
his blade,
He has been themed by myriads, his glory never
will fade.
“I did not willingly slay a single one of them,” mused Guan Yu as he rode
along. “There was no help for it. Nevertheless when Cao Cao hears of it, he
will regard me as ungrateful for his bounty.”
Before long he saw a rider on the road who soon hailed him and proved to be Sun
Qian.
“I have never heard a word from you since we lost sight of each other at
Runan. How have you fared?” said Guan Yu.
“After your departure Liu Pi and Gong Du retook the city. I was sent by them
to Yuan Shao to try to make peace with him and succeeded, so that Yuan Shao
invited Liu Bei to go to him and share in the deliberations for a concerted
attack on Cao Cao. But to my disgust the leaders of Yuan Shao’s army showed
great jealousy of each other so that Tian Feng got into gaol, Ju Shou was
degraded, and others quarreled. Then Yuan Shao vacillated and hesitated, so
that your brother and I consulted how we might get away from them all. Now the
Uncle is at Runan with Liu Pi and, thinking you could not know that and might
suffer some harm if you unwillingly went to Yuan Shao, I have come to warn you.
It is good fortune to find you like this. Now we can hasten to Runan, and you
will meet your brother.”
Guan Yu took Sun Qian to make his bow to the ladies, who asked after his
adventures, and Sun Qian said, “Uncle Liu Bei were nearly executed due to
Yuan Shao’s sudden bursts of anger after the deaths of Yan Liang and Wen
Chou. Now, however, he is out of his way and safe at Runan, and you will meet
him soon.”
The ladies covered their faces and wept at the recital of his dangers. Then the
party no longer traveled north but took the road toward Runan. Not long after a
great cloud of dust was noticed behind them, and that presently made out a
hundred of horsemen. These were led by Xiahou Dun, who shouted out to Guan Yu
to stop.
One by one the pass commanders stopped his
progress and were slain,
The river crossed, another army comes and he
must fight again.
How finally Guan Yu escaped death will appear in the succeeding chapter.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 28 ****
Sun Qian had joined Guan Yu in escorting the two ladies, and they were on the
road to Runan when Xiahou Dun suddenly determined to pursue. So with a couple
of hundred horse, Xiahou Dun set out. When Xiahou Dun was seen approaching,
Guan Yu bade Sun Qian go ahead with the carriage while he remained to deal with
the pursuers.
When they were near enough, Guan Yu said, “In coming after me thus you do not
reinforce the magnanimity of your master!”
Replied Xiahou Dun, “The Prime Minister has sent no definite instructions.
You have caused the death of several people, among them one of my commanders,
and so I have come to capture you! You have behaved most grossly. The Prime
Minister will decide.”
Thereupon Xiahou Dun dashed forward with his spear ready to thrust.
But at that moment a rider came up behind him at full gallop, crying, “You
must not fight with Guan Yu!”
Guan Yu stayed his steed at once and waited.
The messenger came up, drew from his bosom an official letter, and said to
Xiahou Dun, “The Prime Minister loves General Guan Yu for his loyalty and
honor, and fearing lest Guan Yu might be stopped at the various passes, he sent
me with this letter to show when necessary at any point on the road.”
“But this Guan Yu has slain several commanders of the passes. Does the Prime
Minister know that?” said Xiahou Dun.
The messenger said these things were unknown.
“Then,” said Xiahou Dun, “I will arrest him and take him to the Prime
Minister, who may set him free or not as he wills.”
“Do you think I fear anything you can do?” said Guan Yu getting wrathful.
And he rode forward. Xiahou Dun, nothing loth, set his spear and prepared for
battle. They met and had reached the tenth encounter when a second horseman
came up at full speed, crying, “Generals, wait a little!”
Xiahou Dun stayed his hand and asked the messenger, saying, “Am I to arrest
him?”
“No,” replied the messenger. “Fearing lest he should have difficulties at
the passes, the Prime Minister has sent me with a dispatch to say he is to be
released.”
“Did the Prime Minister know that he had slain several commanders on the
way?”
“He did not know!”
“Since he was ignorant of that, I may not let this Guan Yu go,” and Xiahou
Dun gave the signal to his men to close in round Guan Yu.
But Guan Yu flourished his sword and made to attack them and a fight was again
imminent, when a third rider appeared, who cried, “Guan Yu, give way and do
not fight!”
The speaker was Zhang Liao. Both combatants made no further move but awaited
his arrival.
Zhang Liao said, “I bring the Prime Minister’s order that since he has
heard that Guan Yu has slain certain commanders on the way, he fears that some
will hinder his passage. Wherefore he has sent me to deliver his command at
each gate that Guan Yu is to be suffered to pass freely.”
Xiahou Dun said, “Qin Qi was the son of Cai Yang’s sister, and he was
confided to my especial care. Now this Guan Yu has killed him, and how can I
refrain?”
“When I see his uncle Cai Yang, I will explain. But now the main point is
that you have the Prime Minister’s orders to let Guan Yu pass and you may not
despise his wish.”
So the only thing for Xiahou Dun to do was to retire, and he did.
“Whither are you going?” then said Zhang Liao to Guan Yu.
“I fear my brother is no longer with Yuan Shao, and now I am going to find
him wherever he is.”
“As you do not know where to go, why not return to the Prime Minister?”
“Where is the sense of that?” said Guan Yu with a smile. “But, Zhang
Liao, you return, and try to arrange pardon for my faults.”
With this Guan Yu saluted Zhang Liao and took his leave. Zhang Liao retired and
joined Xiahou Dun.
Guan Yu quickly regained the carriage, and as they went along side by side he
told Sun Qian what had happened. Several days later a heavy rain storm came on
which soaked everything. Looking about for protection they noticed a farm under
the shelter of a precipice and took their way thither. An old man came out to
them, to whom they told their story.
When they had finished, the old fellow said, “My name is Guo Chang, and I
have lived here many years. I am very pleased to greet the man whom I have
known so long by reputation.”
Guo Chang quickly killed a sheep for their refreshment and brought out wine for
the two men. The two ladies were entertained in the inner apartments. And while
they refreshed themselves, their baggage was put out to dry and their steeds
were fed.
As the day closed in, they saw several youths come along, and their host said,
“My son is come to pay his respects.”
“This is my humble son,” said Guo Chang, presenting a lad to Guan Yu.
“What has he been doing?” asked Guan Yu.
“He has just come in from hunting.”
The young fellow went out. The old man continued, “All my family have been
farmers or scholars. He is my only son, and instead of following in the
footsteps of his ancestors he cares for nothing but gadding about and hunting,
unhappily.”
“Why unhappily?” said Guan Yu. “In these days of disorder a good soldier
can make a name for himself.”
“If he would only learn the military arts, that would be something of a
career. But he is nothing but a vagabond and does everything he should not. He
is a grief to me.”
Guan Yu sighed in sympathy. The old gentleman stayed till a late hour; and when
he took his leave, his two guests began to prepare for rest.
Suddenly outside there arose a great hubbub, men shouting and horses neighing.
Guan Yu called to his people; but as no one answered, he and Sun Qian drew
their swords and went into the stable yard. There they found their host’s son
on the ground shouting to his followers to fight.
Guan Yu asked what it was all about, and his guards told him, “The young
fellow had tried to steal Red Hare, but had been badly kicked. We heard
shouting and went to see what it meant when his men had set on us.”
Guan Yu was very wrathful.
“You mean thieves! Would you steal my horse?” cried he.
But before he could do anything, his host came running out, saying, “It was
not with my consent that my son did this evil thing. I know he is very guilty
and deserves death. But his mother loves him tenderly, and I pray you be
generous and pardon him!”
“Really he is unworthy of his father,” said Guan Yu. “What you told me
shows he is a degenerate. For your sake I pardon him.”
Then Guan Yu told his own people to keep a better lookout, sent the people
about their business and, in company with Sun Qian, went away to rest.
Next morning both the host and hostess were up betimes waiting to thank Guan Yu
for forgiving their son’s mad freak.
“My son has insulted your tiger dignity, I know, and I am deeply affected by
your kindness in not punishing him,” said the old man.
“Bring him here and I will talk to him,” said Guan Yu.
“He went out before daylight with a lot of his fellow rogues, and I know not
where he is.”
So Guan Yu bade them farewell, got the ladies into their carriage, and they
moved out of the farmyard. Guan Yu and Sun Qian riding abreast as escort. They
took the road toward the hills.
Before they had gone far, they saw a large party of men, led by a couple of
riders, pouring down one of the gullies. One of the riders wore a yellow turban
and a battle robe. The other was Guo Chang’s son.
The wearer of the turban called out, saying, “I am one of the commanders of
Zhang Jue the Lord of Heaven. Whoever you may be, leave that horse you are
riding for me. You may then go free!”
Guan Yu greeted the speech with a hearty laugh.
“O you mad ignoramus! If you had ever been with Zhang Jue as a bandit, you
would have learned to know Liu Bei, Guan Yu, and Zhang Fei, the three
brothers.”
“I have heard of the ruddy long beard called Guan Yu, but I have never seen
him. Who may you be?”
Guan Yu then laid aside his sword, stopped his horse, and drew off the bag that
covered his beard thus showing its magnificence.
The turban wearer immediately slipped out of the saddle, laid an angry hand on
his companion, and they both bowed low in front of Guan Yu’s steed.
“Who are you?” asked Guan Yu.
“I am Pei Yuanshao. After the death of Zhang Jue, I was left forlorn; and I
got together a few others like myself, and we took refuge in the forests. This
morning early this fellow came to tell us that a guest at his father’s farm
had a valuable horse and proposed to me to steal it. I did not think I should
meet you, General.”
The wretched Guo Chang’s son implored that his life might be spared, and Guan
Yu pardoned him for his father’s sake. Then Guan Yu covered his face and
crept away.
“You did not recognize me. How then did you know my name?” asked Guan Yu.
Pei Yuanshao replied, “Not far from here is a mountain called the Sleeping
Bull, where lives a certain Zhou Cang, a very powerful man who came from the
west. He has a stiff curly beard and looks very handsome. He also was a
commander in the rebel army, who took to the forest when his leader perished.
He has told me a lot about you, but I have never had the happiness of seeing
you.”
Said Guan Yu, “Under the green wood trees is no place for a hero’s foot.
You had better abandon this depraved life and return to the path of virtue. Do
not work out your own destruction.”
As they were talking, a troop of horsemen appeared in the distance. They
belonged to Zhou Cang, as Pei Yuanshao said, and Guan Yu waited for them to
approach. The leader was very dark complexioned, tall, and armed with a spear.
As soon as he drew near enough to see, he exclaimed joyfully, “This is
General Guan Yu!”
In a moment he had slipped out of the saddle and was on his knees by the
roadside.
“Zhou Cang renders obeisance,” said he.
Said Guan Yu, “O Warrior, where have you known me?”
“I was one of the Yellow Scarves, and I saw you then. My one regret was that
I could not join you. Now that my good fortune has brought me here, I hope you
will not reject me. Let me be one of your foot soldiers to be always near you
to carry your whip and run by your stirrup. I will cheerfully die for you.”
As he seemed thoroughly in earnest, Guan Yu said, “But if you follow me, what
of your companions?”
“They may do as they please: Follow me or go their ways.”
Thereupon they all shouted, “We will follow!”
Guan Yu dismounted and went to ask the ladies what they thought of this.
Lady Gan replied, “Brother-in-law, you have traveled thus far alone and
without fighters; you have safely passed many dangers and never wanted their
assistance. You refused the service of Liao Hua, why then suffer this crowd?
But this is only a my view and you must decide.”
“What you say, sister-in-law, is to the point.”
Therefore returning to Zhou Cang, he said, “It is not that I am lacking in
gratitude, but my sisters-in-law do not care for a large following. Wherefore
return to the mountains till I shall have found my brother, when I will surely
call you.”
Zhou Cang replied, “I am only a rough uncouth fellow, wasting his life as a
brigand. Meeting you, General, is like seeing the full sun in the skies, and I
feel that I can never bear to miss you again. As it might be inconvenient for
all my people to follow you, I will bid my companion lead them away, but I will
come and follow you on foot wherever you go.”
Guan Yu again asked his sisters-in-law what they thought of this. Lady Gan said
one or two made no difference, and so Guan Yu consented. But Pei Yuanshao was
not satisfied with this arrangement and said he wished also to follow.
Zhou Cang said, “If you do not stay with the band, they will disperse and be
lost. You must take command for the moment and let me accompany General Guan
Yu. As soon as he has a fixed abode, I will come to fetch you.”
Somewhat discontentedly Pei Yuanshao accepted the situation and marched off,
while his one-time colleague joined the train of Guan Yu, and they went toward
Runan. They traveled quickly for some days, and then they saw a city on a hill.
The natives told them, “This city is called Gucheng. A few months before a
warrior suddenly appeared, drove out the magistrate, and took possession. Then
he has begun to recruit soldiers, bought up horses, and laid in stores. The
warrior’s name is Zhang Fei. Now he has a large force, and no one in the
neighborhood dare face him.”
“To think that I should find my brother like this!” said Guan Yu,
delighted. “I have had never a word of him, nor knew I where he was since
Xuzhou fell.”
So Guan Yu dispatched Sun Qian into the city to tell its new commander to come
out to meet him and provide for their sisters-in-law.
Now, after being separated from his brothers, Zhang Fei had gone to the
Mangdang Hills, where he had remained a month or so while he sent far and near
for tidings of Liu Bei. Then as he happened to pass Gucheng, he had sent in to
borrow some grain, but had been refused. In revenge, he had driven away the
magistrate and taken possession of the city. He found the place well suited to
his needs at the moment.
As directed by Guan Yu, Sun Qian entered the city and, after the usual
ceremonies, told Zhang Fei the news, “Liu Bei has left Yuan Shao and gone to
Runan; and Guan Yu, with your sisters-in-law, is at the gates. He wishes you to
go out and receive them.”
Zhang Fei listened without a word till he came to the request to go out to meet
his brother. At that point he called for his armor and, when he had put it on,
laid hold of his long serpent halberd, mounted, and rode out with a large
company at his back. Sun Qian was too astonished to ask what this meant and
simply followed.
Guan Yu was very glad when he saw his brother coming, put up his weapons and,
with Zhou Cang at his back, rode toward him at full speed. But as Guan Yu
approached, he saw all the signs of fierce anger on Zhang Fei’s face, and
Zhang Fei roared as he shook his spear, threatening Guan Yu.
Guan Yu was entirely taken aback and called out anxiously, “Brother, what
does this mean? Is the Peach Garden Pledge quite forgotten?”
“What impudence is this that you come to see me since your disgraceful
behavior?” shouted Zhang Fei.
“What disgraceful behavior has been mine?” said Guan Yu.
“You have betrayed your brother; you have surrendered to Cao Cao; and you
have received title and office at his hands. And now you are come to exploit
me. One of us shall die!”
Guan Yu said, “Really you do not understand, and it is hard for me to
explain. But ask the two ladies here, worthy brother, and they will tell
you.”
At this the ladies lifted the curtain of the carriage and called out:
“Brother, why is this?”
Zhang Fei said, “Wait a while, sisters, and see me slay this traitor. After
that I will conduct you into the city.”
Said Lady Gan, “Since he knew not where you were, our brother took shelter
with Cao Cao. And since he knew that his elder brother was at Runan, he has
braved every danger to escort us thus far on the road. Pray take a correct view
of his conduct.”
Lady Mi also chimed in, “When your brother went to Xuchang, no other course
was open to him.”
“Sisters, do not let him deceive you to the truth. Real loyalty prefers death
to dishonor. No good person can serve two masters.”
Guan Yu said, “Brother, cease to wrench me I pray you.”
Sun Qian said, “Guan Yu came expressly to seek you.”
“How much more nonsense will you talk?” roared Zhang Fei. “How can he be
true-hearted? He came to capture me, I say.”
“Had I come to capture you, I should have come with troops and horses,”
said Guan Yu.
“And are there not troops and horses?” said Zhang Fei pointing to a point
behind Guan Yu.
Guan Yu turned, and there he saw a cloud of dust rising as though a squadron of
horse was coming. And soon they were near enough, and from their trumpets and
banners they showed themselves to be of Cao Cao’s army.
“Now will you try to cajole me further?” cried Zhang Fei in a rage.
He set his serpent halberd and was just coming on when Guan Yu said,
“Brother, wait a while. See me slay the leader of these that I may prove
myself no traitor.”
“Well, if you are really true, prove it by slaying that leader, whoever he
may be, before I have finished three rolls of the drum.”
Zhang Fei’s condition was accepted. Soon the attacking force was near enough
to make out the leader to be Cai Yang.
Sword in hand Cai Yang rode at full speed, crying, “So I have found you,
slayer of my nephew! I have a command to capture you and will execute it.”
Guan Yu made no reply. Raising his sword ready to strike, he moved out and the
drums began to beat. Before a roll could be completed the fight was over, and
Cai Yang’s head had rolled on the ground. His force scattered and fled. Guan
Yu, however, captured the young ensign bearer and questioned him.
The youth said, “The fact is the Prime Minister had not given an order.
Incensed at the loss of his nephew, Cai Yang wished to cross the river to
pursue and attack you, General, although the Prime Minister refused permission.
To satisfy him, the Prime Minister had sent Cai Yang to attack Runan, and the
meeting at this place is entirely an accident.”
Guan Yu bade him repeat this story to his brother. Zhang Fei also questioned
him concerning all that had happened in the capital, and the recital of the
whole story satisfied Zhang Fei of the fidelity of Guan Yu.
Just then messengers came from the city to Zhang Fei to say: “Some scores of
horsemen has arrived at the south gate. They seem in a great hurry but no one
know them.”
Zhang Fei, with still a lingering doubt in his mind, went to look at the
newcomers and there saw some forty mounted archers with light bows and short
arrows. Hastily dismounting to see them better, he found they were Mi Zhu and
Mi Fang.
Quickly slipping out of the saddle, they came up and Mi Zhu said, “After the
dispersal at Xuzhou when we lost sight of you, we returned to our village
whence we sent all around for news of you. We heard that Guan Yu had
surrendered to Cao Cao and our lord was in the North of Yellow River with Yuan
Shao. The one of whom we could hear nothing was yourself. But yesterday, while
on our way, we fell in with some travelers who told us a certain General Zhang
Fei, of such and such an appearance, had suddenly occupied Gucheng, and we felt
it must be you. So we came to inquire, and we happily fell in with you here.”
Zhang Fei replied, “Guan Yu and Sun Qian are here, and my two sisters are
with them. They had heard where my elder brother was.”
This news added to the joy of the two newcomers who went to see Guan Yu and the
women, and then they all entered the city. When the ladies had settled down a
little, they related the whole story of the adventures on the road at which
Zhang Fei was overcome with remorse and bowed before his brother bitterly
weeping. Mi Zhu and Mi Fang were greatly affected. Then Zhang Fei related what
had happened to him.
A day was spent in banquets, and next day Zhang Fei wished his newly found
brother to go with him to Runan to see their elder brother Liu Bei.
But Guan Yu said, “No. you take care of the ladies here while Sun Qian and I
go to get news.”
So Guan Yu and Sun Qian with a small escort set out. When they reached Runan,
they were received by Liu Pi.
“Liu Bei is no longer in the city. After waiting some days, he has come to
the conclusion that the soldiers are too few, and has gone back to Yuan Shao to
consult with him,” said Liu Pi.
Guan Yu was greatly disappointed, and Sun Qian did his best to console him,
saying, “Do not be sorrowful. It only means the trouble of another journey
into the North of Yellow River to tell Uncle Liu Bei, and then we can all meet
at Gucheng.”
So spoke Sun Qian, and Guan Yu accepted it. They took leave of Liu Pi and
returned to Gucheng where they related what had happened.
Zhang Fei wanted to go with them into the North of Yellow River, but Guan Yu
opposed this, saying, “Seeing you have this city, it makes a rallying point
for us and a resting place. We must not abandon it lightly. Sun Qian and I will
go; and while sway we look to you to keep the city safe.”
“How can you go after killing the two generals, Yan Liang and Wen Chou?”
“That will not stop me. And after I am there, I can act according to
circumstances.”
Then Guan Yu summoned Zhou Cang and asked him, saying, “How many followers
are there with Pei Yuanshao at Sleeping Bull Mountain?”
“I should think four or five hundred.”
“Now,” said Guan Yu, “I am going to take the shortest road to find my
brother. Can you go to summon your army and lead them along the high road to
assist me?”
With instructions to bring up this force, Zhou Cang left, while Guan Yu and Sun
Qian and their small escort went off to the north.
When they drew near the boundary, Sun Qian said, “You must be careful how you
go over. You ought to stop here while I go in, see Uncle Liu Bei, and take the
necessary steps.”
Seeing the wisdom of this, Guan Yu stopped there and sent his companion in
advance. He and his followers going up to a nearby farm as an abiding place.
When they got to the farm, out came a venerable man leaning on a staff. After
exchanging salutes, Guan Yu told the old man all about himself.
“My family name is also Guan, my personal name being Ding,” said the old
man. “I know your reputation, and I am very happy to meet you.”
Guan Ding sent for his two sons to come and make their bow. He put up Guan Yu
in his house and provided for his escort in the farm buildings.
In the meantime Sun Qian had made his way to Jizhou City and told Liu Bei the
whole story.
Liu Bei said, “Jian Yong is also here. We will send for him secretly to talk
over this matter.”
They did so; and when the usual salutes had been exchanged, they three began to
consider the means of getting away.
“My lord,” said Jian Yong, “you see Yuan Shao personally and say you wish
to go to Jingzhou to see Liu Biao about a scheme for the destruction of Cao
Cao. That will give an excuse.”
“That seems best,” said Liu Bei, “but will you go with me?”
“I have another plan to extricate myself,” said Jian Yong.
Having settled their plans, Liu Bei soon went in to see his protector and
suggested, “Liu Biao is strong and well posted. His help should be sought
against our enemy.”
“I have sent messengers repeatedly to ask his help,” said Yuan Shao, “but
he is unwilling.”
“As he and I are of the same family, he will not refuse me if I go and ask
him,” said Liu Bei.
“Certainly he is worth much more than Liu Pi. You shall go.”
“I have just heard,” Yuan Shao continued, “that Guan Yu has left Cao Cao
and wants to come here. If he does, I will put him to death out of revenge for
my two beloved generals —-Yan Liang and Wen Chou.”
“Illustrious Sir, you wished to employ him and so I sent for him. Now you
threaten to put him to death. The two men he slew were but deer compared with
such a tiger as he is. When you exchange a couple of deer for a tiger, you need
not complain of the bargain.”
“Really I like him,” said Yuan Shao. “I was only joking. You can send
another messenger for him and tell him to come soon.”
“May I send Sun Qian for him?”
“Certainly.”
After Liu Bei had gone, Jian Yong came in and said to Yuan Shao, “If Liu Bei
goes, he will not come back. I had better go to speak to Liu Biao. And I can
keep a watch on Liu Bei.”
Yuan Shao agreed and issued orders for both to go.
On the subject of the mission, Guo Tu came in to his chief to dissuade him.
Said Guo Tu, “Liu Bei went to speak to Liu Pi, but he accomplished nothing.
Now you are sending Jian Yong with him, and I am sure neither will ever
return.”
“Do not be too suspicious,” said Yuan Shao. “Jian Yong is clever
enough.”
That was the end of the interview. Forthwith Liu Bei sent Sun Qian back to Guan
Yu and then, with Jian Yong, took leave of Yuan Shao and rode out of the city,
As soon as they reached the border line, they met Sun Qian and all three rode
off to Guan Ding’s farm to meet Guan Yu. He came out to welcome them, bowed
and then seized his brother’s hands while tears streamed down his face.
Presently the two sons of their host came to bow to the visitors. Liu Bei asked
their names.
“These are of the same name as myself,” said Guan Yu. “The sons are Guan
Neng, who is a student, and Guan Ping, who is to be a soldier.”
“I have been thinking of sending the younger in your train, General,” said
old Guan Ding, “Would you take him?”
“What is his age?” said Liu Bei.
“He is eighteen.”
Liu Bei said, “Since, O Senior, you are so kind, I venture to suggest that
your son should be adopted by my brother, who has no son of his own. What think
you of that?”
Guan Ding was perfectly willing, so he called Guan Ping and bade him make a
son’s obeisance to Guan Yu and to style Liu Bei “Uncle.”
Then it was time to get on their way lest they should be pursued, and with Guan
Yu went Guan Ping. Guan Ding and Guan Ning escorted them a long distance and
then returned.
The party took the road to Sleeping Bull Mountain. Before they had gone very
far, they met Zhou Cang with a small party. He was wounded. He was introduced
to Liu Bei who asked him how it was.
He replied, “Before I reached the hill, a certain warrior all alone, had
fought with my friend Pei Yuanshao and killed him. Then many of our troops
surrendered to him, and he occupied our old camp. When I reached it, I tried to
allure the soldiers back to my side but only succeeded with a few. The others
were too afraid. I got angry and engaged the interloper, who however worsted me
time after time and wounded me thrice.”
“Who is the warrior? What does he look like?” asked Liu Bei.
“All I know he is a doughty fighter, I do not know his name.”
Thereafter they advanced toward the hill with Guan Yu in front and Liu Bei in
rear. When they drew near, Zhou Cang began to abuse his enemy, who soon
appeared, mailed and armed, coming down the hill like a tornado.
Suddenly Liu Bei rode out waving his whip and shouting, “O Zhao Zilong, I am
here to look for you!”
Indeed the rider was Zhao Zilong. He instantly slipped out of the saddle and
bowed by the roadside.
Liu Bei dismounted to talk with him and ask how he came to be there.
“When I left you, I had no idea that Gongsun Zan was a man who would listen
to no reason. The result was disaster, and he perished in the flames. Yuan Shao
invited me to him several times, but I thought too little of him to go. Then I
wanted to go to Xuzhou to you, but you had lost that place, and Guan Yu had
gone over to Cao Cao, and you had joined Yuan Shao. Several times I thought of
coming to you, but I feared Yuan Shao. So I drifted from one place to another
with nowhere to rest till I happened to come this way, and Pei Yuanshao tried
to steal my horse. So I slew him and took possession of his camp. I heard Zhang
Fei was in Gucheng but thought it might be only a rumor. And so the days have
passed till this happy meeting.”
Liu Bei told Zhao Zilong all that had happened to him since they parted, and so
did Guan Yu.
Said Liu Bei, “The first time I saw you, I felt drawn to you and did not want
to part from you. I am very happy to meet you again.”
“In all my wanderings, trying to find a lord worth serving, I have seen no
one like you. Now I have reached your side, that is enough for all my life. I
care not what may happen to me.”
Next they burned the camp on Sleeping Bull Mountain, after which they all took
the road back to Gucheng where they were welcomed. They exchanged the stories
of their several adventures, and the two ladies related the valiant deeds of
Guan Yu whereat Liu Bei was too affected to speak.
Then they performed a great sacrifice to Heaven and Earth with the slaughter of
a bull and a horse.
The soldiers also were recompensed for their toils. Liu Bei surveyed the
conditions around him and found therein much to rejoice at. His two brothers
were restored to his side and none of his helpers were missing. Moreover he had
gained Zhao Zilong, and Guan Yu had acquired an adopted son Guan Ping. Another
commander had joined his ranks in the person of Zhou Cang. There was every
occasion for feasting and gratification.
Scattered wide were the brothers, none knew another’s retreat,
Joyfully now they foregather, dragon and tigers meet.
At this time the forces under the command of Liu Bei, Guan Yu, Zhang Fei, Zhao
Zilong, Sun Qian, Jian Yong, Mi Zhu, Mi Fang, Guan Ping, and Zhou Cang numbered
four or five thousand soldiers. Liu Bei was in favor of leaving Gucheng and
occupying Runan, and just then Liu Pi and Gong Du, the commanders of that city,
sent to invite him to go there. So they went. There they devoted all their
efforts to strengthen their army, both horse and foot.
Yuan Shao was much annoyed when Liu Bei did not return and at first was for
sending a force after him. However Guo Tu dissuaded him.
“Liu Bei needs cause you no anxiety. Cao Cao is your one enemy and must be
destroyed. Even Liu Biao, though strongly posted on River Han, is none too
terrible. There is Sun Ce on the southeast of the Great River, strong, feared,
with wide domain of six territories, a large army, and able counselors and
leaders; you should make an alliance there against Cao Cao.”
Guo Tu won his chief to his view and wrote to Sun Ce, sending the letter by
Chen Zhen.
Just as one warrior leaves the north,
Another from the east comes forth.
Future chapters will reveal the outcome of these dispositions.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 29 ****
Sun Ce gradually became supreme on the southeast of the Great River. In the
fourth year of Rebuilt Tranquillity (AD 199), he took Lujiang by the defeat of
the Governor Liu Xu. He dispatched Yu Fan with a dispatch to Governor Hua Xin
of Yuzhang, and Hua Xin surrendered. Thence Sun Ce’s renown increased, and he
boldly sent a memorial on his military successes to the Emperor by the hand of
Zhang Hong.
Cao Cao saw in Sun Ce a powerful rival and said, “He is a lion difficult to
contend with.”
So Cao Cao betrothed his niece, daughter of Cao Ren, to Sun Kuang, the youngest
brother of Sun Ce, thus connecting the two families by marriage. Cao Cao also
retained Zhang Hong near him in the capital.
Then Sun Ce sought the title of Grand Commander, one of the highest offices of
state, but Cao Cao prevented the attainment of this ambition, and Sun Ce keenly
resented it. Henceforward his thoughts turned toward an attack on Cao Cao.
About this time the Governor of Wujun, Xu Gong, sent a secret letter to the
capital to Cao Cao, saying:
“Sun Ce is a turbulent fellow of the Xiang Yu type. The government ought,
under the appearance of showing favor to him, to recall him to the capital, for
he is a danger in the southern regions.”
But the bearer of this letter was captured on the Great River and sent to Sun
Ce, who immediately put him to death. Then Sun Ce treacherously sent to ask the
author of the letter to come and consult over some affair. The unsuspecting Xu
Gong came.
Sun Ce produced the letter, saying, “So you wish to send me to the land of
the dead, eh?”
And thereupon the executioners came in and strangled Xu Gong. The family of the
victim scattered, but three of his clients determined to avenge him if only
they could find some means of attacking Sun Ce.
One day Sun Ce went hunting in the hills to the west of Dantu. A stag was
started, and Sun Ce pressed after it at topmost speed and followed it deep into
the forest. Presently he came upon three armed men standing among the trees.
Rather surprised to see them there, he reined in and asked who they were.
“We belong to Han Dang’s army and are shooting deer,” was the reply.
So Sun Ce shook his bridle to proceed. But just as he did so, one of the men
thrust at him with a spear and wounded his thigh. Sun Ce drew the sword at his
side, dashed forward, and tried to cut down the aggressor. The blade of his
sword suddenly fell to the ground, only the hilt remaining in his hand. Then
one of the assassins drew his bow, and an arrow wounded Sun Ce in the cheek.
Sun Ce plucked out the arrow and shot at the offender, who fell, but the other
two attacked him furiously with their spears, shouting, “We are Xu Gong’s
men and his avengers!”
Sun Ce then understood. But he had no weapons save his bow against them. He
tried to draw off, keeping them at bay striking with his bow. But the fight was
getting too much for him, and both he and his steed were wounded in several
places. However, just at the critical moment, Cheng Pu and some of his own
officers came up, and they minced the assassins into pieces.
But their lord was in a sorry plight. His face was streaming with blood, and
some of the wounds were very severe. They tore up his robe and therewith bound
up his wounds, and they carried him home.
A poem in praise of the three avengers says:
O Sun Ce was a warrior and a stranger he to fear.
But he was basely murdered while hunting of the deer.
Yet were they leal who slew him, to avenge a murdered lord.
Self immolated like Yu Rang, they dreaded not the sword.
Badly wounded, Sun Ce was borne to his home. They sent to call the famous
physician Hua Tuo, but he was far away and could not be found. However, a
disciple of his came, and the wounded man was committed to his care.
“The arrowheads were poisoned,” said the physician, “and the poison has
penetrated deep. It will take a hundred days of perfect repose before danger
will be past. But if you give way to passion or anger, the wounds will not
heal.”
Sun Ce’s temperament was hasty and impatient, and the prospect of such a slow
recovery was very distasteful. However, he remained quiet for some twenty of
the hundred days. Then came Zhang Hong from the capital, and Sun Ce insisted on
seeing and questioning him.
“Cao Cao fears you, my lord, very greatly,” said Zhang Hong, “and his
advisers have exceeding respect for you —-all except Guo Jia.”
“What did Guo Jia say?” asked the sick chieftain.
Zhang Hong remained silent, which only irritated his master and caused him to
demand to be told. So Zhang Hong had to speak the truth.
He said, “The fact is Guo Jia told Cao Cao that he needed not fear you, that
you were frivolous and unready, impulsive and shallow, just a stupid swaggerer
who would one day come to his death at the hands of some mean person.”
This provoked the sick man beyond endurance.
“The fool, how dare he say this of me?” cried Sun Ce. “I will take
Xuchang from Cao Cao, I swear.”
It was no more a question of repose. Ill as he was, he wanted to begin
preparations for an expedition at once. They remonstrated with him, reminded
him of the physician’s orders and urged him to rest.
“You are risking your priceless self in a moment’s anger,” said Zhang
Zhao.
Then arrived Chen Zhen, the messenger from Yuan Shao, and Sun Ce would have him
brought in.
He said, “My master wishes to ally himself with the South Land in an attack
on Cao Cao.”
Such a proposal was just after Sun Ce’s heart. At once he called a great
meeting of his officers in the wall tower and prepared a banquet in honor of
the messenger. While this was in progress, Sun Ce noticed many of his officers
whispering to each other, and they all began to go down from the banquet
chamber. He could not understand this and inquired of the attendants near him
what it meant.
They told him, “Saint Yu Ji has just gone by, and the officers have gone down
to pay their respects to him.”
Sun Ce rose from his place and went and leaned over the railing to look at the
man. He saw a Daoist priest in snowy garb leaning on his staff in the middle of
the road, while the crowd about him burnt incense and made obeisance.
“What wizard fellow is this? Bring him here!” said Sun Ce.
“This is Yu Ji,” said the attendants. “He lives in the east and goes to
and fro distributing charms and draughts. He has cured many people as everybody
will tell you, and they say he is a saint. He must not be profaned.”
This only angered Sun Ce the more, and he told them to arrest the man at once
or disobey at their peril. So there being no help for it, they went down into
the road and hustled the saint up the steps.
“You madman! How dare you incite people to evil?” said Sun Ce.
“I am but a poor priest of the Langye Mountains. More than half a century
ago, when gathering simples in the woods, I found near the Yangqu Spring a book
called ‘The Way of Peace.’ It contains a hundred and more chapters and
taught me how to cure the diseases of humans. With this in my possession I had
only one thing to do: To devote myself to spreading its teachings and saving
humankind. I have never taken any thing from the people. Can you say I incite
people to evil deeds?”
“You say you take nothing: Whence came your clothes and your food? The fact
is you are one of the Yellow Scarves, and you will work mischief if you are
left alive.”
Then turning to his attendants, Sun Ce ordered, “Take him away and put him to
death.”
Zhang Zhao interceded, “The Daoist Saint has been here in the east these many
years. He has never done any harm and does not deserve death or punishment.”
“I tell you I will kill these wizard fellows just as I would cattle.”
The officials in a body interceded, even the guest of honor, Chen Zhen, but in
vain. Sun Ce refused to be placated. He ordered Yu Ji to be imprisoned.
The banquet came to an end, and Chen Zhen retired to his lodging. Sun Ce also
returned to his palace.
His treatment of the Daoist Holy Man was theme of general conversation and soon
reached the ears of his mother.
Lady Wu sent for her son to the ladies’ apartments and said to him, “They
tell me you have put Saint Yu Ji in bonds. He has cured many sick people, and
the common folk hold him in great reverence. Do not harm him!”
“He is simply a wizard who upsets the multitude with his spells and craft. He
must be put to death,” replied Sun Ce.
Lady Wu entreated him to stay his hand, but he was obstinate.
“Do not heed the gossip of the streets, Mother,” said he. “I must be
judge of these matters.”
However, Sun Ce sent to the prison for Yu Ji in order to interrogate him. Now
the gaolers, having a great respect for Yu Ji and faith in his powers, were
very indulgent to him and did not keep him in the collar. However when Sun Ce
sent for him, they put on him with collar and fetters all complete.
Sun Ce had heard of their indulgence and punished the gaolers, and ordered the
prisoner thereafter to be put in constant torture. Zhang Zhao and many others,
moved by pity, made a petition which they humbly presented, and they offered to
become surety for him.
Sun Ce said to them, “Gentlemen, you are all great scholars, but why do you
not understand reason? Formerly in Jiaozhou was Imperial Protector Zhang Jing,
who was deluded by these vicious doctrines into beating drums, twanging lyres,
burning incense, and such things. He wore a red turban and represented himself
as able to ensure victory to an army. But he was slain by the enemy. There is
nothing in all this, only none of you will see it. I am going to put this
fellow to death in order to stop the spread of this pernicious doctrine.”
Lu Fan interposed, saying, “I know very well this Yu Ji can control the
weather. It is very dry just now, why not make him pray for rain as an
amercement?”
“We will see what sort of witchcraft he is equal to,” said Sun Ce.
Thereupon he had the prisoner brought in, loosed his fetters, and sent him up
to an altar to intercede for rain.
The docile Daoist Yu Ji prepared to do as he was bidden. He first bathed
himself, then dressed himself in clean garments. After that he bound his limbs
with a cord and lay down in the fierce heat of the sun. The people came in
crowds to look on.
Said Yu Ji, “I will pray for three spans high of refreshing rain for the
benefit of the people, nevertheless I shall not escape death thereby.”
The people said, “But if your prayer be efficacious, our lord must believe in
your powers.”
“The day of fate has come for me, and there is no escape.”
Presently Sun Ce came near the altar and announced that if rain had not fallen
by noon, he would burn the priest. And to confirm this he bade them prepare the
pyre.
As it neared noon a strong wind sprang up, and the clouds gathered from all
quarters. But there was no rain.
“It is near noon,” said Sun Ce. “Clouds are of no account without rain.
He is only an impostor.”
Sun Ce bade his attendants lay the priest on the pyre and pile wood around him
and apply the torch. Fanned by the gale the flames rose rapidly. Then appeared
in the sky above a wreath of black vapor, followed by roaring thunder and vivid
lightning, peal on peal and flash on flash. And the rain fell in a perfect
deluge. In a short time the streets became rivers and torrents. It was indeed a
three-span fall.
Yu Ji, who was still lying upon the pile of firewood, cried in a loud voice,
“O Clouds, cease thy rain, and let the glorious sun appear!”
Thereupon officials and people helped the priest down, loosened the cord that
bound him, and bowed before him in gratitude for the rain.
But Sun Ce boiled with rage at seeing his officers and the people gathered in
groups and kneeling in the water regardless of the damage to their clothing.
“Rain or shine are as nature appoints them, and the wizard has happened to
hit upon a moment of change. What are you making all this fuss about?” cried
he.
Then he drew his sword and told the attendants to smite the Daoist Saint
therewith. They all besought him to hold his hand.
“You want to follow Yu Ji in rebellion, I suppose,” cried Sun Ce.
The officers, now thoroughly cowed by the rage of their lord, were silent and
showed no opposition when the executioners seized the Daoist Saint and beheaded
him.
As the head fell, they saw just a wreath of black smoke drift away to the
northeast where lay the Langye Mountains.
The corpse was exposed in the market place as a warning to enchanters and
wizards and such people. That night there came a very violent storm, and when
it calmed down at daylight, there was no trace of the body of Yu Ji. The guards
reported this, and Sun Ce in his wrath sentenced them to death. But as he did
so, he saw Yu Ji calmly walking toward him as if the Daoist Saint were still
alive. Sun Ce drew his sword and darted forward to strike at the wraith, but he
fainted and fell to the ground.
They carried him to his chamber, and in a short time he recovered
consciousness.
His mother, Lady Wu, came to visit him and said, “My son, you have done wrong
to slay the holy one, and this is your retribution.”
“Mother, when I was a boy, I went with Father to wars, where people are cut
down as one cuts reed stalks. There is not much retribution about such doings.
I have put this fellow to death and so checked a great evil. Where does
retribution come in?”
“This comes of want of faith,” she replied. “Now you must avert the evil
by meritorious deeds.”
“My fate depends on Heaven. Wizards can do me no harm, so why avert
anything?”
His mother saw that it was useless to try persuasion, but she told his
attendants to do some good deeds secretly whereby the evil should be turned
aside.
That night about the third watch, as Sun Ce lay in his chamber, he suddenly
felt a chill breeze, which seemed to extinguish the lamps for a moment,
although they soon brightened again; and he saw in the lamp light the form of
Yu Ji standing near his bed.
Sun Ce said, “I am the sworn foe of witchcraft, and I will purge the world of
all such as deal in magic. You are a spirit, and how dare you approach me?”
Reaching down a sword that hung at the head of his bed, he hurled it at the
phantom, which then disappeared. When his mother heard this story, her grief
redoubled. Sun Ce, ill as he was, went to see his mother and did his utmost to
reassure her.
She said, “Confucius the Teacher says: ‘How abundantly do spiritual beings
display the powers that belong to them!’ and ‘Prayer has been made to the
spirits of the upper and lower worlds.’ You must have faith. You sinned in
putting Saint Yu Ji to death, and retribution is sure. I have already sent to
have sacrifices performed at the Jade Pure Monastery, and you should go in
person to pray. May all come right!”
Sun Ce could not withstand such a mandate from his mother so, mustering all his
strength, he managed to get into a sedan chair and went to the monastery, where
the Daoists received him respectfully and begged him to light the incense. He
did so, but he returned no thanks. To the surprise of all, the smoke from the
brazier, instead of floating upwards and dissipating, collected in a mass that
gradually shaped itself into an umbrella, and there on the top sat Yu Ji.
Sun Ce simply spat abuse and went out of the temple. As he passed the gates,
lo! Yu Ji stood there gazing at him with angry eyes.
“Do you see that wizard fellow?” said he to those about him.
They said they saw nothing. More angry than ever, he flung his sword at the
figure by the gate. The sword struck one of his escorts who fell. Sun Ce told
them to bury the man. But as he went out of the courtyard, he saw Yu Ji walking
in.
“This temple is nothing more than a lurking place for sorcerers and wizards
and such people,” said Sun Ce.
Whereupon he took a seat in front of the building and sent for five hundred
soldiers to pull the place down. When they went up on the roof to strip off the
tiles, Sun Ce saw Yu Ji standing on the main beam flicking tiles to the ground.
More angry than ever, Sun Ce told them to drive out the priests belonging to
the place and burn it. They did so, and when the flames rose their highest, Sun
Ce saw the dead Daoist Yu Ji standing in the midst of the fire.
Sun Ce returned home still in a bad humor, which increased when he saw the form
of Yu Ji standing at his gate. He would not enter but mustered his army and
went into camp outside the city walls. And there he summoned his officers to
meet him and talk over joining Yuan Shao in an attack on Cao Cao.
They assembled, but they remonstrated with him and begged him to consider his
precious health. That night he slept in the camp and again saw Yu Ji, this time
with his hair hanging loose. Sun Ce raged at the vision without cessation.
Next day his mother called him into the city and he went. She was shocked at
the change in his appearance: He looked so utterly miserable. Her tears fell.
“My son,” said Lady Wu, “how wasted you are!”
He had a mirror brought and looked at himself. He was indeed so gaunt and thin
that he was almost frightened and exclaimed, “How do I come to look so
haggard?”
While he spoke, Yu Ji appeared in the mirror. He struck it and shrieked. Then
the half healed wounds reopened and he fainted.
He was raised and borne within. When he recovered consciousness, he said,
“This is the end. I shall die.”
He sent for Zhang Zhao and his other chief officers and his brother, Sun Quan,
and they gathered in his chamber.
He gave them his dying charge, saying, “In the disordered state of the
empire, the domains of Wu and Yue, with its strong defense of the three rivers
and resourceful lands, has a brilliant future. You, Zhang Zhao, must assist my
brother.”
So saying Sun Ce handed his seal to Sun Quan, saying, “For manipulating the
might of Wu so as to make it the deciding force among the factions and then
obtaining the whole empire, you are not so suited as I. But in encouraging the
wise and confiding in the able and getting the best out of everyone for the
preservation of this land, I should not succeed as you will. Remember with what
toil and labor your father and I have won what we possess, and take good care
thereof.”
Sun Quan wept as he knelt to receive the seal, and the dying Sun Ce turned to
his mother, saying, “Mother, the days allotted of Heaven have run out, and I
can no longer serve my tender mother. I have given over the seal to my brother
and trust that you will advise him early and late, and see that he lives worthy
of his predecessors.”
“Alas! Your brother is full young for such a task,” said his mother,
weeping. “I know not what may happen.”
“He is far abler than I and fully equal to the task of ruling. Should he have
doubts upon internal affairs, he must turn to Zhang Zhao; for outer matters he
must consult Zhou Yu. It is a pity Zhou Yu is absent so that I cannot give him
my charge face to face.”
To his brothers Sun Ce said, “When I am gone, you must help your brother.
Should any discord arise in the family, let the others punish the wrongdoer and
let not his ashes mingle with those of his ancestors in the family vaults.”
The young men wept at these words.
Then he called for his wife, Lady Qiao, and said, “Unhappily we have to part
while still in the full vigor of life. You must care for my mother. Your sister
will come to see you presently, and you can ask her to tell her husband, Zhou
Yu, to help my brother in all things and make my brother keep to the way I have
taught him to walk in.”
Then Sun Ce closed his eyes and soon after passed away. He was only twenty-six.
People called him first of the chieftains,
The east had felt his might,
He watched like a tiger crouching.
Struck as a hawk in flight.
There was peace in the lands he ruled.
His fame ran with the wind.
But he died and left to another.
The great scheme in his mind.
As his brother breathed his last, Sun Quan sank by the bed and wept.
“This is not the time to mourn,” said Zhang Zhao. “First see to the
funeral ceremonies and that the government is safe.”
So the new ruler dried his tears. The superintendence of the funeral was
confided to Sun Jing, and then Zhang Zhao led his young master to the hall to
receive the felicitations of his officers.
Sun Quan was endowed with a square jaw and a large mouth; he had green eyes and
a purple beard.
Formerly, when Minister Liu Wan had gone to Wu to visit the Sun family, he said
of the family of brothers, “I have looked well at them all, and they are all
clever and perspicacious, but none of them have the very ultimate degree of
good fortune. Only the second, Sun Quan, has the look of a deep thinker. His
face is remarkable, and his build unusual, and he has the look of one who will
come to great honor.”
When Sun Quan succeeded to his brother and his brother’s might, there was
still some reorganization to be done. Soon Zhou Yu had arrived at Wujun.
The young ruler received him very graciously and said, “I need have no
anxiety now that you have come.”
Zhou Yu had been sent to hold Baqiu. When he heard that his chief had been
wounded, he thought it well to return to see how he was. But Sun Ce had died
before Zhou Yu could arrive. He hurried to be present at the funeral.
When Zhou Yu went to wail at the coffin of his late chief, Lady Wu, the dead
man’s mother, came out to deliver her son’s last injunctions.
When she had told him the last charge, Zhou Yu bowed to the earth, saying, “I
shall exert the puny powers I have in your service as long as I live.”
Shortly after Sun Quan came in, and, after receiving Zhou Yu’s obeisance,
said, “I trust you will not forget my brother’s charge to you.”
Zhou Yu bowed, saying, “I would willingly suffer any form of death for
you.”
“How best can I maintain this great charge which I have inherited from my
father and brother?”
“He who wins people, prospers; he who loses them, fails. Your present plan
should be to seek people of high aims and farseeing views, and you can
establish yourself firmly.”
“My brother bade me consult Zhang Zhao for internal administration, and
yourself on external matters,” said Sun Quan.
“Zhang Zhao is wise and understanding and equal to such a task. I am devoid
of talent and fear to take such responsibility, but I venture to recommend to
you as a helper one Lu Su, a man of Linhuai. This man’s bosom hides strategy,
and his breast conceals tactics. He lost his father in early life and has been
a perfectly filial son to his mother. His family is rich and renowned for
charity to the needy. When I was stationed at Juchao, I led some hundreds of
soldiers across Linhuai. We were short of grain. Hearing that the Lu family had
two granaries there, each holding three thousand carts, I went to ask for help.
Lu Su pointed to one granary and said, ‘Take that as a gift.’ Such was his
generosity!
“He has always been fond of fencing and horse archery. He was living in Que.
His grandmother died while he was there, and he went to bury her in Dongcheng,
and then his friend, Liu Ziyang, wished to engage him to go to Chaohu and join
Zheng Bao. However, he hesitated about that and has not gone yet. You should
invite him without loss of time.”
Sun Quan at once sent Zhou Yu to engage the services of this man, and Zhou Yu
set out. When the obeisance was over, Zhou Yu laid before Lu Su the inducements
that his own master held out.
Lu Su replied, “I have been engaged by Liu Ziyang to go to Chaohu, and I am
just starting thither.”
Said Zhou Yu, “Of old Ma Yuan said to Liu Xiu, ‘This is an age when not
only do princes select their ministers, but ministers must also choose their
princes.’ Now our General Sun Quan calls to him the wise and treats his
officers well. Thus he engages the help of the wonderful and gets the services
of the extraordinary in a way that few others do. But if you are not engaged
elsewhere, come with me to the South Land as the best thing to do.”
Lu Su returned with Zhou Yu and saw Sun Quan, who treated him with the greatest
deference and with him discussed affairs very fully. The conference proved so
interesting that it went on all day and neither felt fatigue.
One day at the close of the usual reception, Sun Quan kept Lu Su to dine with
him. They sat up late and by and by slept on the same couch as would the
closest of friends.
In the dead of night Sun Quan said to his bedfellow, “The dynasty is failing,
and everything is at sixes and sevens. I have received a great charge from my
father and brother, and I am thinking of imitating the actions of the
celebrated Protectors of Reign, Wen and Huan, and becoming the leader of the
feudal lords, and I pray you instruct me.”
Lu Su replied, “Of old the Founder of Han, the Supreme Ancestor, wished to
honor and serve Emperor Yi of Qin, but could not on account of Xiang Yu’s
evildoings. Now Cao Cao can be compared with Xiang Yu: How can you be the
protector of the Emperor? My humble opinion is that the Hans have fallen beyond
hope of recovery and Cao Cao cannot be destroyed, and that the only key to your
big schemes is to secure your present position in order to keep the master hand
and control the combinations among the others. Now take advantage of the
turmoil in the north to smite Huang Zu and attack Liu Biao in Jingzhou. Thereby
you will command the whole length of the Great River. Then you may consolidate
the empire and become the Son of Heaven. This was how the Supreme Ancestor
acted.”
Hearing this Sun Quan was very greatly pleased. He threw on some clothing, got
up, and thanked his newly-found adviser. Next day Sun Quan gave Lu Su costly
gifts and sent robes and silks to his mother.
Lu Su then recommended a friend of his to Sun Quan’s notice, a man of wide
reading and great ability. He was also a filial son. His name was Zhuge Jin,
and he came from Nanyang. Sun Quan treated Zhuge Jin as a superior guest. This
man dissuaded Sun Quan from making common cause with Yuan Shao, but advised him
rather to favor Cao Cao, against whom he could plan when occasion served. Sun
Quan therefore sent back the messenger Chen Zhen with dispatches that broke off
all negotiations.
Hearing of Sun Ce’s death, Cao Cao was for sending an expedition against the
south.
But Zhang Hong dissuaded him, saying, “It would be mean to take advantage of
the period of mourning. And if you should not overcome him, you will make him
an enemy instead of being a friend. It would be preferable to treat him
generously.”
So Cao Cao memorialized the Throne and obtained for Sun Quan the title of
General and Governor of Kuaiji, while Zhang Hong was appointed Commander under
Sun Quan.
And a seal of office was sent to Sun Quan by Zhang Hong. The new appointment
pleased Sun Quan, and he was greatly glad to get Zhang Hong back again. Then
Zhang Hong was sent to act jointly with Zhang Zhao in the administration.
Zhang Hong was the means of getting another into Sun Quan’s service. His
friend was Gu Yong, a disciple of the Historian Cai Yong. Gu Yong was a man of
few words and an abstainer from wine. He was very correct in all things. Sun
Quan appointed Gu Yong Deputy Governor.
Henceforward Sun Quan’s rule was very prosperous, and he waxed mightily in
influence and won the love of all the people.
When Chen Zhen had returned and related the events in the South Land and told
of the honors that Cao Cao had obtained for Sun Quan in return for his support,
Yuan Shao was very wroth, and he set about preparing for an attack on Xuchang
with a force of seven hundred thousand northern soldiers.
Although in the south they rest from war,
They rattle the spears beneath the northern star.
Later it will be seen which side conquered.


****** Romance of the Three Kingdoms ******
**** Chapter 30 ****
Hearing that Yuan Shao was hastening to attack at Guandu, Xiahou Dun wrote to
the capital urgently asking for reinforcements, and Cao Cao told off seventy
thousand troops with which he marched. Xun Yu was left to guard the capital.
Just as Yuan Shao’s army was starting, Tian Feng sent out a remonstrance from
his prison cell, saying, “My lord, a hasty attack in full scale will bring
disaster to our army. It is best now to wait upon such times as Heaven should
appoint.”
Peng Ji said to Yuan Shao, “Why does this Tian Feng utter ill-omened words?
My lord is sending forth an army in the cause of humanity and justice.”
Easily moved to anger, Yuan Shao was going to execute Tian Feng, but this time
he forbore at the entreaties of many of his officers.
However, he was not appeased, for he said, “I will punish Tian Feng when I
return from conquering Cao Cao.”
Meanwhile Yuan Shao hastened to start. The banners of his host filled the
horizon, their swords were as trees in the forest. They marched to Yangwu and
there made a strong camp.
Then Ju Shou once more opposed any hasty movement, saying, “Though our
soldiers are many, they are not so bold as the enemy. However, veterans as are
the enemy, they have not ample supplies. Therefore they will wish to force on a
speedy battle, while our policy is to hold them off and delay. If we can keep
from a decisive battle long enough, the victory will be ours without
fighting.”
This advice did not appeal to Yuan Shao.
Said he, threateningly, “Tian Feng spoke discouraging words to my armies, and
I will assuredly put him to death on my return. How dare you follow in the same
way?”
Yuan Shao summoned the lictors and sent away the adviser in chains, saying,
“When I have overcome Cao Cao, then will I deal with you and Tian Feng
together!”
The huge army was camped in four divisions, one toward each point of the
compass. The camps were thirty miles in circuit. Scouts and spies were sent out
to discover the strong and the weak points of the enemy.
Cao Cao’s army arrived and were smitten with fear when they heard of the
strength of their enemy. The leader called together his council.
Then said Adviser Xun You, “The enemy are many but not terrible. Ours is an
army of veterans, every soldier of ours worth ten of theirs. But our advantage
lies in a speedy battle, for unhappily our stores are insufficient for a long
campaign.”
“You speak to the point,” said Cao Cao. “I think the same.”
Therefore Cao Cao issued orders to press noisily forward and force on a battle.
Yuan Shao’s soldiers took up the challenge, and the two sides were arrayed.
On Yuan Shao’s side, Shen Pei placed ten thousand of crossbowmen in ambush on
the two wings, while five thousand of archers held the center. The signal for
general attack was a bomb, and the onset was to continue through three rolls of
the drum.
Yuan Shao wore a silver helmet and breastplate and an embroidered robe held in
by a jeweled belt. He took up his post in the center with his commanders —-
Gao Lan, Zhang He, Han Meng, Chunyu Qiong, and others —-ranged right and
left. His banners and ensigns made a brave show.
When Cao Cao’s army’s center opened and the banners moved aside, the
chieftain appeared on horseback with his staff of doughty leaders all fully
armed —-Xu Chu, Zhang Liao, Xu Huang, Li Dian, and others.
Pointing with his whip at Yuan Shao, Cao Cao cried, “In the presence of the
Emperor, I pressed your claims to consideration and obtained for you the title
of Regent Marshal. Why do you now plan rebellion?”
Yuan Shao replied, “You take the title of a minister of Han, but you are
really a rebel against the House. Your crimes and evil deeds reach to the
heavens, and you are worse than the usurper Wang Mang and the rebel Dong Zhuo.
What are these slanderous words about rebellion that dare you address to me?”
“I have a command to make you prisoner!”
“I have the Girdle Decree to arrest rebels!” replied Yuan Shao.
Then Cao Cao became wrathful and bade Zhang Liao ride forth as his champion.
From the other side rode Zhang He on a curvetting steed. The two champions
fought forty or fifty bouts with no advantage to either. In his heart Cao Cao
thought the contest amazing. Then Xu Chu whirled up his sword and went to help.
From the other side, to match him rode out Gao Lan with his spear set, and the
contestants were now four, battling two and two. Then Cao Cao ordered three
thousand troops under Xiahou Dun and Cao Hong to attack the opponents’ array.
Thereupon on Yuan Shao’s side, Shen Pei gave the signal for attack, and the
legion of crossbowmen on the wings shot and the center archers let fly all
together. The arrows flew all over the field in front, and Cao Cao’s troops
could not advance. They hastened away toward the south. Yuan Shao threw his
soldiers on their rear, and they were broken. They fled away toward Guandu, and
Yuan Shao advanced another stage. He camped near them.
Then Shen Pei said, “Now send one hundred thousand soldiers to guard Guandu,
and get near Cao Cao’s camp. Then build up observation mounds to get a clear
view of the enemy, and choose vantage points whence to shoot arrows into the
midst of their host. If we can force him to evacuate this place, we shall have
gained a strategic point whence Capital Xuchang can be attacked.”
Yuan Shao adopted this suggestion. From each of the camps, they sought out the
strongest veterans who dug with iron spades and carried earth to raise mounds
near Cao Cao’s camp.
Cao Cao’s soldiers saw what their enemies were doing and were anxious to make
a sortie and drive them off. But the archers and crossbowmen came out
commanding the narrow throat through which it was necessary to attack and
stayed them. At the end of ten days, they had build up more than half a hundred
mounds, and on the summit of each was a lofty tower, whence the archers could
command their opponents’ camp. Cao Cao’s soldiers were greatly frightened
and held up their bucklers to keep off the various missiles. From the mounds
the arrows flew down like a fierce rain after each roll of drums. The soldiers
of Yuan Shao’s army laughed and jeered when they saw their enemies crouching
under their shields and crawling on the ground to avoid their missiles.
Cao Cao saw that his troops were getting out of hand under this attack, so he
called a council.
Liu Ye spoke up, saying, “Let us make catapults and so destroy them.”
Cao Cao at once had models brought and set cunning workers to make these stone-
throwing machines. They soon constructed some hundreds and placed them along
the walls of the camp inside, just opposite the high ladders on the enemy’s
mounds.
Then Cao Cao’s troops watched for Yuan Shao’s archers to ascend the towers.
As soon as the archers began to shoot, all the catapults began to heave stone
balls into the skies and they wrought great havoc. There was no shelter from
the falling stones, and enormous numbers of the archers were killed. Yuan
Shao’s troops called these machines “Rumblers,” and after their
appearance the archers dared not ascend the mounds to shoot.
Then Shen Pei, the strategist, thought out another plan. He set troops to
tunnel under the walls into the midst of Cao Cao’s camp and called this corps
“The Sappers”. Cao Cao’s soldiers saw the enemy digging out pits behind
the mounds and told the chief, who at once sought a counter plan from Liu Ye.
“As Yuan Shao can no longer attack openly, he is attacking secretly and is
tunneling a road under ground into the midst of our camp,” said Liu Ye.
“But how to meet it?”
“We can surround the camp with a deep moat which renders their tunnel
useless.”
So a deep moat was dug as quickly as possible, and when the enemy sappers
arrived thereat, lo! their labor had been in vain and the sap was useless.
Cao Cao held Guandu throughout the eighth and ninth months when, his army being
worn out and provisions failing, he began to think of giving up and returning
to the capital. As he could not make up his mind, he referred his difficulties
by letter to Xun Yu, whom he had left to guard Xuchang. The reply he got was to
this effect:
“I have received your command to decide whether to continue the campaign or
retire. It appears to me that Yuan Shao assembled such large forces at Guandu
with the expectation of winning a decision. You, Sir, are very weak while he is
very strong. If you cannot get the better of him, he will be able to work his
will on you, and this will be a crisis of the empire. Your opponents are indeed
numerous, but their leader knows not how to use them. With your military genius
and discernment, where are you not sure to succeed? Now though your numbers are
small, your situation is still brighter than Liu Bang’s when he faced against
Xiang Yu in Jungyang and Chenggao. You are securely entrenched with your hands
on Yuan Shao’s throat; and even if you cannot advance, that state of things
cannot endure forever but must change. This is the time to play some unexpected
move, and you must not miss it. The device I leave to your illustrious
ingenuity.”
This letter greatly pleased Cao Cao, and he urged upon his troops to use every
effort to maintain the position.
Yuan Shao then retired some ten miles, and Cao Cao sent out scouts to ascertain
his new dispositions. One of Xu Huang’s officers, Shi Huan, captured an enemy
spy and sent him to his chief. Xu Huang interrogated him and found out that a
convoy of supplies was expected and that this spy and others had been sent to
find out what the risks of the route were. Xu Huang went at once to tell Cao
Cao.
When Xun You heard that the commander of the convoy was Han Meng, he said,
“That fellow is a valiant fool. A few thousand light horse sent to intercept
him can capture the whole train and cause much trouble in the enemy’s
camp.”
“Whom should I send?” asked Cao Cao.
“You might send Xu Huang. He is capable of such a task.”
So Xu Huang was deputed, and he took with him Shi Huan, who had captured the
spy, and his company. And this party was supported by Zhang Liao and Xu Chu.
It was night when the commissariat train of many thousands of wagons drew near
Yuan Shao’s camp. As they passed through a defile, Xu Huang and Shi Huan came
out and stopped the train. Han Meng galloped up to give battle but was soon
overcome. The guard was scattered, and soon the whole train was in flames. The
escort and their leader fled away.
The glow of the flames seen from Yuan Shao’s camp caused great consternation,
which became fear when the escaped soldiers rode in and told their tale.
Yuan Shao sent out Zhang He and Gao Lan to try to intercept the raiders, and
they came upon Xu Huang and his company. Just as Zhang He and Gao Lan were
attacking, reinforcements from Zhang Liao and Xu Chu came up, and the Yuan
Shao’s troops were between two fires. They were cut to pieces and the
successful generals of Cao Cao rode back to Guandu, where they were richly
rewarded.
As an additional safeguard, Cao Cao made a supporting outpost in front of the
main camp to be the apex of a triangle of defense.
When Han Meng returned with his woeful tidings, Yuan Shao was angry and
threatened to put him to death. His colleagues begged him off.
Then said Shen Pei, “Food is very important for an army in the field and must
be defended with the greatest diligence. Wuchao is our main depot and must be
carefully guarded.”
“My plans being complete,” said Yuan Shao. “You may as well return to
Capital Yejun of Jizhou and undertake the control of the supplies. Let there be
no shortage.”
So Shen Pei left the army. Then a force of twenty thousand troops was told off
to defend the depot in Wuchao. The leaders of this body were Chunyu Qiong, Gui
Yuanjin, Han Juzi, Lu Weihuang, and Zhao Rui.
Of these generals, Chunyu Qiong was a hard man and a heavy drinker, who in his
cups was a terror to the soldiers. Under the idle life of guarding the supply
depot, the leaders gave themselves up to indulgence and drank heavily.
In Cao Cao’s army food was also getting scarce, and a message was sent to
Capital Xuchang to send grain quickly. The messenger with the letter, however,
had not gone far when he fell into the hands of Yuan Shao’s guards, who took
him to the adviser Xu You.
Seeing from the letter that Cao Cao was short of supplies, Xu You went to Yuan
Shao and told him, saying, “Cao Cao and we have been at grips here for a long
time, and Capital Xuchang must be undefended. A small army sent quickly could
take it, and at the same moment an attack here would deliver Cao Cao into our
hands. Now is the moment to strike, for his supplies are short.”
Yuan Shao replied, “Cao Cao is full of ruses, and this letter is artfully
designed to bring about a battle to suit himself.”
“If you do not take this chance, he will do you some injury by and by.”
Just at this juncture in came a dispatch from Yejun in which, after some
details regarding the forwarding of grain, Shen Pei said he had discovered that
Xu You had been in the habit of receiving bribes while in Jizhou and had winked
at his relatives collecting excess taxes. One of his son and nephew were then
in prison.
At this Yuan Shao turned on Xu You angrily and said, “How can you have the
face to stand before me and propose plans, you extortionate fellow? You and Cao
Cao have old liking for each other, and he has bribed you to do his dirty work
for him and help his base schemes. Now you want to betray my army. I ought to
take off your head, but temporarily I will let your neck carry it away. Get out
and never let me see you again.”
The discredited adviser sighed and went out, saying, “Faithful words offend
his ear. He is a pest and unworthy of advice from me. And now that Shen Pei has
injured my son and nephew, how can I look my fellow folks in the face again?”
And Xu You drew his sword to end his life. But his people prevented that.
They said, “If Yuan Shao rejects your honest words, then assuredly he will be
taken by Cao Cao. You are an old friend of Cao Cao’s: Why not abandon the
shade for the sunlight?”
Just these few words awakened Xu You to consciousness of his position, and he
decided to leave Yuan Shao and go over to Cao Cao for he was an old friend.
Vainly now for chances lost
Yuan Shao sighs; once he was great.
Had he taken Xu You’s advice,
Cao Cao had not set up a state.
Xu You stealthily left the camp and set out for Cao Cao’s lines. He was
captured on the way. He told his captors: “I am an old friend of the Prime
Minister. Go and tell the Prime Minister that Xu You of Nanyang wishes to see
him.”
They did so. Cao Cao was resting in his tent, his clothing loose and
comfortable after the toils of the day. When he heard who wished to see him, he
arose quite joyfully and hastily ran out, on bare feet, to receive Xu You. Cao
Cao went forth to greet him. They saw each other in the distance, and Cao Cao
clapped his hands with gladness, bowing to the ground when near enough to his
visitor.
Xu You hastened to help him rise, saying, “Sir, you, a great minister, should
not thus salute a simple civilian like me.”
“But you are my old friend, and no name or office makes any difference to
us,” replied Cao Cao.
“Having been unable to choose the lord I would serve, I bowed my head before
Yuan Shao wishing to support him sincerely. But he was deaf to my words and
disregarded my plans. Wherefore I have left him and come now to see my old
friend from whom I hope employment.”
“If you are willing to come, then have I indeed a helper,” said Cao Cao.
“I desire you to give me a scheme for the destruction of Yuan Shao.”
“I counseled him to send a light force to take Capital Xuchang and at the
same time attack here in full scale so that head and tail be both attacked.”
Cao Cao was alarmed, saying, “If he does so, I am lost!”
“How much grain have you in store?” said the new adviser.
“Enough for a year.”
“I think not quite,” said Xu You, smiling.
“Well, half a year.”
The visitor shook out his sleeves, rose and hurried toward the door of the
tent, saying, “I offer him good counsel, and he repays me with deceit. Could
I have expected it?”
Cao Cao held him back.
“Do not be angry,” said he. “I will tell you the truth. Really I have
here only enough for three months.”
“Everybody says you are a marvel of wickedness, and indeed it is true,”
said Xu You.
“But who does not know that in war there is no objection to deceit?”
replied Cao Cao.
Then whispering in Xu You’s ear, he said, “Actually here I have only
supplies for this month’s use.”
“O do not throw dust in my eyes any more. Your grain is exhausted and I know
it.”
Cao Cao was startled, for he thought no one knew of the straits he was in.
“How did you find that out?” said Cao Cao.
Xu You produced the captured letter, saying, “Who wrote that?”
“Where did you get it?”
Whereupon Xu You told Cao Cao the story of the captured messenger.
Cao Cao seized him by the hand, saying, “Since our old friendship has brought
you to me, I hope you have some plan to suggest to me.”
Xu You said, “To oppose a great army with a small one is to walk in the way
of destruction, unless you inflict quick defeat. I can propose a plan which
will defeat the innumerable hordes of Yuan Shao without fighting a battle. But
will you follow my advice?”
“I very much desire to know your plan,” said Cao Cao.
“Your enemy’s stores of all kinds are at Wuchao, where the Commander of the
Guard is that drunkard Chunyu Qiong. You can send some of your trusty veterans
to pretend they belong to one of Yuan Shao’s generals, Jiang Qi, sent to help
guard the depot. These soldiers can find an opportunity to fire the grain and
stores of all kinds, which will upset all Yuan Shao’s calculations. In three
days Yuan Shao is no more.”
Cao Cao greatly approved. He treated Xu You very liberally and kept him in his
camp. Forthwith he chose five thousand of horse and foot ready for the
expedition.
Zhang Liao protested, saying, “The enterprise will be futile as the grain
depot will certainly be well guarded. Without caution, we may be victims of the
treachery on the part of the newly arrived Xu You.”
“Xu You is no traitor,” said Cao Cao. “He has come sent by Heaven to
defeat Yuan Shao. If we do not get grain, it will be hard to hold out. I have
to either follow his advice or sit still and be hemmed in. If he were a
traitor, he would hardly remain in my camp. Moreover this raid has been my
desire for a long time. Have no doubts: The raid will certainly succeed.”
“Well, then, you must look out for an attack here while the camp is
undefended.”
“That is already well provided for,” said Cao Cao gleefully.
The arrangements for the raid on the grain depot were made with extreme care to
ensure success. Cao Cao assigned Xun You, Jia Xu, and Cao Hong to guard the
main camp, together with Xu You; Xiahou Dun and Xiahou Yuan to guard the left
camp; Cao Ren and Li Dian to guard the right camp. When all was ready they set
out, Cao Cao himself in the center, with Zhang Liao and Xu Chu as van leaders
and Xu Huang and Yu Jin as rear guard. The army showed the ensigns of their
opponents. The troops carried bundles of grass and faggots to make a blaze. The
soldiers were gagged and the horses tied round the muzzles so as to prevent any
noise. They set out at dusk.
The night was fine and the stars shone brightly.
Ju Shou, still a prisoner in Yuan Shao’s camp, saw the stars were very
brilliant and told his gaolers to conduct him out to the central pavilion
whence he could study them. While watching he saw the planet Venus invade the
quarter of the Bear and Lyra, which startled him very greatly.
“Some misfortune is near!” said Ju Shou.
So although it was still night, he went to see his master. But Yuan Shao was
sleeping after indulgence in too much wine and was in bad humor. However, when
they had roused him saying that the prisoner had a secret message to deliver,
he got up.
“While I happened to be studying the aspect of the heavens,” said the night
visitor, “I saw Venus, then between Hydra and Cancer, suddenly shoot into the
neighborhood of the Bear and Lyra. There is danger of a robber raid, and
special precautions must be taken at the grain depot. Lose no time in sending
good soldiers and vigorous leaders thither, and keep a lookout on the byways
among the hills that you may escape the wiles of Cao Cao.”
“You are a criminal!” said Yuan Shao. “How dare you come with such wild
nonsense to upset my armies.”
And turning to the gaolers Yuan Shao continued, “I bade you confine him. Why
did you let him come?”
Then he issued orders to put the gaolers to death and appointed others to keep
the prisoner in close custody.
Ju Shou went away, wiping his falling tears and sighing deeply, “Our
soldiers’ destruction is at hand, and I know not where our poor corpses may
find a resting place.”
Blunt truth offended Yuan Shao,
Too stupid any plan to make,
His stores destroyed this is evident
That Jizhou also is at stake.
Cao Cao’s raiding party went along through the night. Passing one of Yuan
Shao’s outpost camps, they were challenged.
Cao Cao sent forward a man to say, “Jiang Qi has orders to go to Wuchao to
guard the grain stores.”
Seeing that the raiders marched under the ensigns of Yuan Shao, the guard had
no suspicions and let them pass. At every post this ruse was effective, and
they got safely through. They reached their objective at the end of the fourth
watch, the straw and wood were placed in position without loss of time, and the
blaze started. Then Cao Cao’s commanders beat to attack.
At this time Chunyu Qiong and his companions were all asleep after a heavy
drinking bout. However, when the alarm was given, they sprang up and asked what
was the matter. The hubbub was indescribable. Very soon the fuddled officers
were caught with hooks and hauled out of their camp.
Yuan Shao’s generals Gui Yuanjin and Zhao Rui were just returning from taking
grain to the camp and seeing the flames arise, they hastened to assist.
Some of Cao Cao’s soldiers ran to him, saying, “The enemy is coming up in
the rear. Send reinforcements.”
But Cao Cao only replied, “Press on to the front till the enemy is actually
close at hand and then face about.”
So the attack was pressed on and they all hastened forward. Very soon the fire
gained strength, and thick smoke hung all around filling the sky. When Gui
Yuanjin and Zhao Rui drew near, Cao Cao turned about and attacked them. They
could not stand this for a moment, and both generals were killed. Finally the
stores of grain and forage were utterly destroyed.
The commander, Chunyu Qiong, was made prisoner and taken to Cao Cao who ordered
him to be deprived of ears, nose, and hands. He was bound on a horse and sent,
thus horribly mutilated, to his master.
From Yuan Shao’s camp, the flames of the burning depot were seen away in the
north, and they knew what they meant. Yuan Shao hastily summoned his officers
to a council to send a rescue party.
Zhang He offered to go with Gao Lan, but Guo Tu said, “You may not go. It is
certain that Cao Cao is there in person, wherefore his camp is undefended. Let
loose our soldiers on the camp, and that will speedily bring Cao Cao back
again. This is how Sun Bin besieged Wei and thereby rescued Zhao.”
But Zhang He said, “Not so; Cao Cao is too wily not to have fully prepared
against a chance attack. If we attack his camp and fail and Chunyu Qiong should
be caught, we shall all be captured too.”
Guo Tu said, “Cao Cao will be too intent on the destruction of the grain to
think of leaving a guard. I entreat you to attack his camp.”
So Yuan Shao sent five thousand soldiers under Zhang He and Gao Lan to attack
Cao Cao’s camp, and he sent ten thousand with Jiang Qi to go to recover the
grain store.
Now after overcoming Chunyu Qiong, Cao Cao’s troops dressed themselves in the
armor and clothing of the defeated soldiers and put out their emblems, thus
posing as defeated force running back to their own headquarters. And when they
happened upon Jiang Qi’s rescue body, they said they had been beaten at
Wuchao and were retreating. So Cao Cao’s troops were suffered to pass without
molestation while Jiang Qi hastened on. But soon Jiang Qi came to Zhang Liao
and Xu Chu who cried out, “Stop!”
And before Jiang Qi could make any opposition, Zhang Liao had cut him down.
Soon his force were killed or dispersed, and the victors sent false messengers
to Yuan Shao’s camp to say that Jiang Qi had attacked and driven away the
attackers of the granaries. So no more relief were sent that way. However, Yuan
Shao sent reinforcements to Guandu.
In due course, the Yuan Shao’s force came down upon Cao Cao’s camp at
Guandu, and the defenders —-Xiahou Dun, Cao Ren, and Cao Hong —-at once
came out and fought them on three sides so that they were worsted. By the time
reinforcements arrived, Cao Cao’s army, returning from the raid, had also
come, and Yuan Shao’s army were attacked in the rear. So they were quite
surrounded. However, Zhang He and Gao Lan managed to force their way out and
got away.
When the remains of the defenders of the grain stores reached their master’s
camp, they were mustered. Seeing the mutilated state of their one time leader,
Yuan Shao asked how Chunyu Qiong had come to betray his trust and to suffer
thus.
The soldiers told their lord, “The General was intoxicated at the time of the
attack.”
So Yuan Shao ordered Chunyu Qiong to be forthwith executed.
Guo Tu, fearing lest Zhang He and Gao Lan would return and testify the whole
truth, began to intrigue against them.
First Guo Tu went to his lord, saying, “Those two, Zhang He and Gao Lan, were
certainly very glad when your armies were defeated.”
“Why do you say this?” asked Yuan Shao.
“O they have long cherished a desire to go over to Cao Cao. So when you sent
them on the duty of destroying his camp, they did not do their best and so
brought about this disaster.”
Yuan Shao accordingly sent to recall these two to be interrogated as to their
faults. But Guo Tu sent a messenger in advance to warn them, as though in
friendly guise, of the adverse fate that awaited them.
So when the orders reached them to return to answer for their faults, Gao Lan
asked, “For what reason are we recalled?”
“Indeed I do not know,” said the messenger.
Gao Lan drew his sword and killed the messenger.
Zhang He was astonished at this demonstration, but Gao Lan said, “Our lord
has allowed someone to malign us and say we have been bought by Cao Cao. What
is the sense in our sitting still and awaiting destruction? Rather let us
surrender to Cao Cao in reality and save our lives.”
“I have been wanting to do this for some time,” replied Zhang He.
Wherefore both, with their companies, made their way to Cao Cao’s camp to
surrender.
When they arrived, Xiahou Dun said to his master, “These two have come to
surrender, but I have doubts about them.”
Cao Cao replied, “I will meet them generously and win them over, even if they
have treachery in their hearts.”
The camp gates were opened to the two officers, and they were invited to enter.
They laid down their weapons, removed their armor, and bowed to the ground
before Cao Cao, who said, “If Yuan Shao had listened to you, he would not
have suffered defeat. Now you two coming to surrender are like Wei Zi leaving
the falling House of Shang to go to Zhou and Han Xin leaving Xiang Yu to go
over to the rising House of Han.”
Cao Cao made them Generals and conferred upon Zhang He the title of Lord of
Duting and upon Gao Lan Lord of Donglai, which pleased them much.
And so as Yuan Shao had formerly driven sway his adviser, Xu You, so now he had
alienated two leaders and had lost his stores at Wuchao, and his army was
depressed and down-hearted.
When Xu You advised Cao Cao to attack Yuan Shao as promptly as he could, the
two newly surrendered generals volunteered to lead the way. So Cao Cao sent
Zhang He and Gao Lan to make a first attack on the camp, and they left in the
night with three thousand troops. The fighting went on confusedly all night but
stayed at dawn. Yuan Shao had lost half of his army.
Then Xun You suggested a plan to Cao Cao, saying, “Now is the moment to
spread a report that an army will go to take Suanzao and attack Yejun, and
another to take Liyang and intercept the enemy’s retreat. Yuan Shao, when he
hears of this, will be alarmed and tell off his troops to meet this new turn of
affairs; and while he is making these new dispositions, we can have him at
great disadvantage.”
Cao Cao adopted the suggestion, and care was taken that the report spread far
around. It came to the ears of Yuan Shao’s soldiers, and they repeated it in
camp. Yuan Shao believed it and ordered his son Yuan Tan with fifty thousand
troops to rescue Yejun, and General Xin Ming with another fifty thousand to go
to Liyang, and they marched away at once. Cao Cao heard that these armies had
started, and at once dispatched troops in eight divisions to make a
simultaneous attack on the nearly empty camp. Yuan Shao’s troops were too
dispirited to fight and gave way on all sides.
Yuan Shao without waiting to don his armor went forth in simple dress with an
ordinary cap upon his head and mounted his steed. His youngest son, Yuan Shang,
followed him. Four of the enemy generals —-Zhang Liao, Xu Chu, Xu Huang, and
Yu Jin —-with their forces pressed in his rear, and Yuan Shao hastened across
the river, abandoning all his documents and papers, baggage, treasure, and
stores. Only eight hundred horsemen followed him over the stream. Cao Cao’s
troops followed hard but could not come up with him. However, they captured all
his impedimenta, and they slew some eighty thousands of his army so that the
watercourses ran blood and the drowned corpses could not be counted. It was a
most complete victory for Cao Cao, and he made over all the spoil to the army.
Among the papers of Yuan Shao was found a bundle of letters showing secret
correspondence between him and many persons in the capital and army.
Cao Cao’s personal staff suggested that the names of those concerned should
be abstracted and the persons arrested, but their lord said, “Yuan Shao was
so strong that even I could not be sure of safety. How much less other
people?”
So Cao Cao ordered the papers to be burned and nothing more was said.
Now when Yuan Shao’s soldiers ran away, Ju Shou, being a prisoner, could not
get away and was captured.
Taken before Cao Cao, who knew him, Ju Shou cried aloud, “I will not
surrender!”
Said Cao Cao, “Yuan Shao was foolish and neglected your advice: Why still
cling to the path of delusion? Had I had you to help me, I should have been
sure of the empire.”
Ju Shou was well treated in the camp, but he stole a horse and tried to get
away to Yuan Shao. This angered Cao Cao who recaptured him and put him to
death, which he met with brave composure.
“I have slain a faithful and righteous man!” then said Cao Cao sadly.
And the victim was honorably buried at Guandu. His tomb bore the inscription
This is the tomb of Ju Shou the Loyal and Virtuous.
Ju Shou was honest and virtuous,
The best in Yuan Shao’s train,
From him the stars no secrets held,
In tactics all was plain.
For him no terrors had grim death.
Too lofty was his spirit,
His captor slew him, but his tomb
Bears witness to his merit.
Cao Cao now gave orders to attack Jizhou.
In feeling over confident, that’s where one’s weakness lay;
The other bettered him by plans which never went astray.
The following chapter will tell who won the next campaign.
